Advanced
Grammar 
in Use
A self-study reference and practice book 
for advanced learners of English
Third Edition 
with answers and CD-ROM
Martin Hewings

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, New Y ork, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape T own,  
Singapore, São Paulo, Delhi, Mexico City
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UK
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781107699892
Third edition © Cambridge University Press, 1999, 2013
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written 
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 1999
Second edition 2005
Third edition first published 2013
Printed in Italy by L.E.G.O. S.p.A.  
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library
ISBN 978-1-107-69989-2  Paperback with answers and CD-ROM for Windows XP ,  Vista or 7  
and Mac OSX 10.6, 10.7
ISBN 978-1-107-69738-6 Paperback with answers
ISBN 978-1-107-61378-2 Paperback without answers
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or
accuracy of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in
this publication, and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is,
or will remain, accurate or appropriate. Information regarding prices, travel
timetables and other factual information given in this work is correct at
the time of first printing but Cambridge University Press does not guarantee
the accuracy of such information thereafter.
iii
Thanks     vii
To the student     viii
To the teacher     ix
Tenses
 1 Present continuous and present simple 1
 2 Present continuous and present simple 2
 3 Past simple and present perfect
 4 Past continuous and past simple 
 5 Past perfect and past simple
 6 Present perfect continuous and present perfect
 7 Past perfect continuous, past perfect and past continuous
 8 Present and past time: review 
The future
 9 Will and be going to
 10 Present simple and present continuous for the future
 11 Future continuous and future perfect (continuous)
 12 Be to + inﬁ nitive; be about to + inﬁ nitive
 13 Other ways of talking about the future
 14 The future seen from the past
Modals and semi-modals
 15 Can, could, be able to and be allowed to
 16 Will, would and used to
 17 May and might
 18 Must and have (got) to
 19 Need(n’t), don’t need to and don’t have to
 20 Should, ought to and had better
Linking verbs, passives, questions
 21 Linking verbs: be, appear, seem; become, get, etc. 
 22 Forming passive sentences 1
 23 Forming passive sentences 2: verb + -ing or to-inﬁ nitive
 24 Using passives
 25 Reporting with passives; It is said that ...
 26 Wh-questions with who, whom, which, how and whose
 27 Negative questions; echo questions; questions with that-clauses
Verb complementation: what follows verbs
 28 Verbs, objects and complements
 29 Verb + two objects
 30 Verb + -ing forms and inﬁ nitives 1
 31 Verb + -ing forms and inﬁ nitives 2
Contents
If you are not sure which units you need to study, use the Study planner on page 210.
iv
Reporting
 32 Reporting people’s words and thoughts
 33 Reporting statements: that-clauses
 34 Verb + wh-clause
 35 Tense choice in reporting
 36 Reporting offers, suggestions, orders, intentions, etc.
37  Modal verbs in reporting
38 Reporting what people say using nouns and adjectives
39 Should in that-clauses; the present subjunctive
Nouns
 40 Agreement between subject and verb 1
 41 Agreement between subject and verb 2
 42 Agreement between subject and verb 3
 43 Compound nouns and noun phrases
Articles, determiners and quantiﬁers
 44 A / an and one
 45 A / an, the and zero article 1
 46 A / an, the and zero article 2
 47 A / an, the and zero article 3
 48 Some and any
 49 No, none (of) and not any
 50 Much (of), many (of), a lot of, lots (of), etc.
 51 All (of), whole, every, each
 52 Few, little, less, fewer
Relative clauses and other types of clause
 53 Relative pronouns 
 54 Other relative words: whose, when, whereby, etc.
 55 Prepositions in relative clauses 
 56 Other ways of adding information to noun phrases 1: additional noun phrases, etc. 
 57 Other ways of adding information to noun phrases 2: prepositional phrases, etc.
 58 Participle clauses with adverbial meaning 1
 59 Participle clauses with adverbial meaning 2
Pronouns, substitution and leaving out words
 60 Reﬂexive pronouns: herself, himself, themselves, etc. 
 61 One and ones
 62 So and not as substitutes for clauses, etc. 
 63 Do so; such
 64 More on leaving out words after auxiliary verbs 
 65 Leaving out to-inﬁnitives
If you are not sure which units you need to study, use the Study planner on page 210.
v
Adjectives and adverbs
 66 Position of adjectives 
 67 Gradable and non-gradable adjectives 1
 68 Gradable and non-gradable adjectives 2
 69 Participle adjectives and compound adjectives
 70 Adjectives + to-inﬁnitive, -ing, that-clause, wh-clause
 71 Adjectives and adverbs
 72 Adjectives and adverbs: comparative and superlative forms
 73 Comparative phrases and clauses
 74 Position of adverbs 1
 75 Position of adverbs 2
 76 Adverbs of place, direction, indeﬁnite frequency, and time
 77 Degree adverbs and focus adverbs
 78 Comment adverbs and viewpoint adverbs
Adverbial clauses and conjunctions
 79 Adverbial clauses of time
 80 Giving reasons: as, because, etc.; for and with
 81 Purposes and results: in order to, so as to, etc.
 82 Contrasts: although and though; even though / if; while, whilst and whereas
 83 If 1
 84 If 2
 85 If I were you ...; imagine he were to win
 86 If ... not and unless; if and whether; etc.
 87 Connecting ideas in a sentence and between sentences
Prepositions
 88 Prepositions of position and movement
 89 Between and among
 90 Prepositions of time
 91 Talking about exceptions
 92 Prepositions after verbs
 93 Prepositions after nouns
 94 Two- and three-word verbs: word order 
Organising information
 95 There is, there was, etc. 
 96 It 1 
 97 It 2 
 98 Focusing: it-clauses and what-clauses
 99 Inversion 1
 100 Inversion 2
If you are not sure which units you need to study, use the Study planner on page 210.
vi
Appendix 1 Irregular verbs     202
Appendix 2 Passive verb forms     204
Glossary     205
Study planner     210
Grammar reminder     222
Additional exercises     240
Key to Exercises     251
Key to Study planner     277
Key to Additional exercises     278
Index of grammatical items     281
Index of lexical items     287
If you are not sure which units you need to study, use the Study planner on page 210.
vii
I would like to thank all those who worked with me on the ﬁ rst two editions of Advanced Grammar in 
Use, in particular Jeanne McCarten and Alison Sharpe for their encouragement. Thanks also to my former 
colleagues and students in the English for International Students Unit at the University of Birmingham for 
their help and interest. 
For this third edition I am grateful to Colin McIntosh, Nora McDonald, Annabel Marriott, Sabina Sahni, 
Kevin Doherty, Andy George, Claire Cole and Janet Weller. Claire and Janet in particular have given me 
tremendous support in preparing the book and the accompanying CDROM.
Thanks to Sophie Joyce, Sandy Nichols, Katie Mac, Ian Mitchell and David Whamond for the illustrations 
and to Kamae Design for their work on the ﬁ nished product. I would also like to thank Cambridge University 
Press for allowing me access to the Cambridge International Corpus. 
Many students and teachers sent me comments on the 2nd edition, and these have been very helpful in 
writing this new edition. Thank you all for taking the trouble to contact me.
Finally, my thanks, as ever, to Suzanne, David and Ann.
The authors and publishers acknowledge the following sources of photographs and are grateful for the 
permissions granted.
p. 6: WithGod/Shutterstock; p. 11: Comstock Images/Thinkstock; p. 17: Thinkstock; p. 33: Image Source/
Glowimages; p. 39: Thinkstock; p. 109: Thinkstock; p. 114: Bildagentur RM/Glowimages. 
Thanks
To the student
viii
Who the book is for
Advanced Grammar in Use is for advanced students of English. It was written mainly as a self-study 
book, but might also be used in class with a teacher. 
How the book is organised
There are 100 units in the book, each looking at a particular area of grammar. Some sections within 
each unit focus on the particular use of a grammatical pattern, such as will be + -ing (as in will be 
travelling); others explore grammatical contrasts, such as whether to use would or used to in reporting 
past events, or when we use except or except for. The 100 units are grouped under a number of 
headings such as Tenses and The future, and you can ﬁ nd details of this in the Contents. Each unit 
consists of two pages. On the left-hand page are explanations and examples; on the right-hand page 
are practice exercises. The letters next to each exercise show you which section(s) of the left-hand 
page you need to understand to do that exercise. 
At the back of the book you will ﬁ nd a number of further sections.
 Appendices  (pages 202 and 204) Two appendices provide further information about irregular 
verbs and passive verb forms. 
 Glossary (page 205) Although terms to describe grammar have been kept to a minimum, some 
have been included, and you can ﬁ nd explanations of these terms in the Glossary.
 Study planner (page 210) You can use the Study planner to help you decide which units you should 
study, or which parts of the Grammar reminder you should read ﬁ rst. 
 Grammar reminder (page 222) This presents examples and explanations of areas of grammar that 
you are likely to have studied already at earlier stages of learning English. References on the left-
hand page of each unit point you to the sections of the Grammar reminder relevant to that unit. 
Read these sections to refresh your understanding before you start work on the more advanced 
grammar points in the unit.
 Additional exercises (page 240) If you want further practice of grammar points, follow the 
references at the bottom of the right-hand page of a unit. These will tell you which of the 
Additional exercises to do next. 
 Keys (pages 251, 277 and 278) You can check your answers to the practice exercises, Study planner 
and Additional exercises in the keys. You will also ﬁ nd comments on some of the answers.
 Indexes (pages 281 and 287) Use the Indexes to help you ﬁ nd the grammar or vocabulary you need.
 How to use the book
It is not necessary to work through the units in order. If you know which grammar points you have 
difﬁ culty with, go straight to the units that deal with them, using the Contents or Indexes to help you 
ﬁ nd the relevant unit. When you have found a unit to study, read through any related material in the 
Grammar reminder before you begin. 
You can use the units in a number of ways. You might study the explanations and examples ﬁ rst, do 
the exercises on the opposite page, check your answers in the Key to Exercises, and then look again at 
the explanations if you made any mistakes. If you just want to practise an area of grammar you think 
you already know, you could do the exercises ﬁ rst and then study the explanations for any you got 
wrong. You might of course simply use the book as a reference book without doing the exercises. 
Corpus information
A corpus is a large collection of texts stored on a computer. In writing Advanced Grammar in Use 
we have worked with the Cambridge International Corpus (CIC), a multi-million word collection of 
real speech and writing, and the Cambridge Learner Corpus, a collection of exam answers written by 
students.  From these corpora we can learn more about language in use, and about the common errors 
made by learners. Using this information, we can be sure that the grammar explanations and examples 
in the book reﬂ ect real language, and we can focus on problem areas for learners. We have also used the 
CIC to produce word boxes, listing the most common words found in particular grammar patterns. 

ix
Advanced Grammar in Use was written as a self-study grammar book but teachers might also ﬁ nd 
it useful for supplementing or supporting their classroom teaching. The book will probably be most 
useful for advanced level students for reference and practice. 
No attempt has been made to order the units according to level of difﬁ culty. Instead, you should 
select units as they are relevant to the syllabus that you are following with your students, or as 
particular difﬁ culties arise, rather than working through from beginning to end. Alternatively, you 
could ask students to do the multiple-choice test in the Study planner (page 210) and focus on units 
that deal with areas of grammar where students are least successful. 
Don’t forget to point students to the Grammar reminder (page 222). This is a reference-only section 
which presents basic knowledge on a number of areas of grammar. It will be useful for students to 
read through a section before moving on to the more advanced material in the units. At the beginning 
of each section of the Grammar reminder you will ﬁ nd information about the unit(s) it relates to.  
There are many ways in which you can use the book with a class. You might, for example, present 
the explanations on the left-hand page of a unit, and use the exercises for classroom practice. 
Alternatively, you might want to begin with the exercises and refer to the left-hand page only when 
students are having problems. You could also set particular units or groups of units (such as those on 
Articles or Nouns) for self-study if individual students are having difﬁ culties. Another possibility might 
be to develop your own classroom-based activities around the explanations on the left-hand page of 
a unit, and then set the exercises as consolidation material for self-study. When students need further 
practice of grammar points from a number of different units, refer them to the Additional exercises 
(page 240).  References at the bottom of the right-hand pages show where the relevant Additional 
exercises can be found. 
An edition of Advanced Grammar in Use without the answers is also available, and some teachers 
might prefer to use it with their students.
The third edition of Advanced Grammar in Use has the same comprehensive grammar coverage as 
previous editions, but many of its exercises have been revised and its layout made more user-friendly.
To the teacher
Advanced
Grammar 
in Use
Unit
A
C
B
D
1
2
Performatives
We use the present simple with verbs which perform the action they describe (= performatives):
 I suggest you park outside the city and 
get the bus to the centre. 
 We request that you read the terms 
and conditions carefully before signing. 
Mental state verbs
With some verbs describing mental states (e.g. ﬁ nd, realise, regret, think, understand) we can use 
the present continuous to emphasise that we have recently started to think about something or that 
we are not sure about something. Compare:
 I regret that the company will have to be sold. (= I’ve made the decision and I’m sorry about 
it) and
 I ’m regretting my decision to give her the job. (= I’m increasingly aware that it was the wrong 
decision)
When it means ‘think carefully about’, consider is only used with the present continuous:
 He ’s considering taking early retirement. (not He considers taking early retirement.)
Some other verbs describing preferences and mental states (e.g. agree, believe, conclude, know, 
prefer) are rarely used with the present continuous:
 I believe you now. (not I’m believing you now.)
Some verbs have different meanings when they are used to talk about states and when they describe 
actions. With their ‘state’ meanings, they usually take simple rather than continuous forms. With their 
‘action’ meanings, they may take simple or continuous forms, depending on context. Compare:
 The app doesn’t appear to work on my phone. (appear: state = seem) and
 Carley Robb is currently appearing in a musical 
on Broadway. / She often appears in musicals. 
(appear: action = take part)
State verbs
We can use the present continuous with some state verbs (e.g. attract, like, look, love, sound) to 
emphasise that a situation is temporary or for a period of time around the present. Compare:
 Ella stays with us quite often. The children love having her here. and
 Ella’s with us at the moment. The children are loving having her here.
State verbs which we rarely use with the present continuous include believe, consist of, doubt, own. 
Present continuous and present simple 1
Reminder ➜ A1–A5
Also: cost, expect, feel, ﬁ t, have, 
imagine, measure, think, weigh
Also: acknowledge, admit, advise, apologise, 
beg, confess, congratulate, declare, deny, 
forbid, guarantee, name, order, permit, predict, 
promise, refuse, remind, request, thank, warn 
Some verbs used as performatives with the present simple in afﬁ rmative (= positive) sentences 
(apologise, deny, guarantee, promise, suggest) have a similar meaning with either the present 
simple or the present continuous in negative sentences:
 I don’t deny / I’m not denying taking the books, but Miguel said it would be okay. 
Modals are often used with performatives to make what we say more tentative or polite:
 We would advise you to arrive two hours before the ﬂ ight leaves. 
 I must beg you to keep this a secret.
Unit
3
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 1 (page 240)
1
1. 1  Complete each pair of sentences using the same verb (in a question form or negative if 
necessary) from the box. Use the present continuous; if this is not possible, use the present 
simple. Use  to add any words outside the gap and use contracted forms where appropriate. 
A & B
attract        consist of        doubt        feel        ﬁ t
have        like         look         measure        sound
 1 a  I hear you’re having your house repainted. How    it looking  ? (or How  it look  ?)
  b I bought this new dress today. How   it look  ?
 2 a A: What are you doing with that ruler?     B:  I  the area of the kitchen.
  b The garden  12 by 20 metres. 
 3 a I  whether I’ll get another chance to retake the exam. 
  b I suppose she might be at home tonight, but I  it. 
 4 a The new science museum currently  10,000 visitors a month.
  b Flowers  bees with their brightly-coloured petals. 
 5 a Carlos won’t work at the top of the 20-storey building because he  heights.
  b A: How’s the new job?     B:  Well, at the moment, I  it at all. 
 6 a My car’s in the garage today. They  new brakes. 
  b I bought this jumper for Anna, but it  her so I’ll have to take it back.
 7 a What’s your shirt made from? It  like silk.
  b I won’t be coming to work today. I  very well. 
 8 a The roof of the house  only plastic sheets nailed down in a few places.
  b Their school uniform  black trousers and a dark green jumper.
 9 a  Simon’s new song  quite good, but he doesn’t think he’s ready yet to perform 
it in public.
  b A: What’s that noise?     B:  It  like a bird stuck in the chimney.
 10 a Poulson  treatment for a knee injury, but should be ﬁ t to play on Saturday.
  b My sister  long blonde hair. You’re bound to recognise her. 
1.2  Cross out any improbable answers. C & D
Dear Aunt Mara,
Thanks for your message. I (1) apologise / ’m apologising for not getting back to you sooner, but I’ve 
been incredibly busy. When I went into nursing, you warned me that it would be really hard work, but 
I (2) admit / ’m admitting that I didn’t really believe you. Don’t get me wrong – I (3) don’t suggest 
/ ’m not suggesting that I’m not enjoying it. It’s incredibly rewarding, but I (4) now realise / ’m now 
realising how hard the job is. When I get home I just eat (not very well, I (5) confess / ’m confessing) 
and go straight to bed. It doesn’t help that the bus journey to the hospital is so slow. I (6) consider / ’m 
considering buying a car, which will make things easier, I hope. 
And what about you? How (7) GR\RX¿QG / DUH\RX¿QGLQJ living in a village after so many years in 
the city? I (8) know / ’m knowingKRZGLI¿FXOWLWLVIRU\RXWRWUDYHOVXFKDORQJZD\EXWLWZRXOGEH
ORYHO\LI\RXFRXOGFRPHDQGVWD\ZLWKPHIRUDZHHNHQG,¶YHJRWSOHQW\RIURRPLQP\ÀDW,don’t 
guarantee / ’m not guaranteeing to cook as well as you do, but I (10) promise / ’m promisingWR¿QG
time to show you around this lovely old town. 
Hope to see you soon. Keep in touch.
Love,
Martina
’s does
does
The present simple is often used in news headlines to talk about events that have recently happened:
We can use the present continuous with adverbs such as always, constantly, continually or forever 
to emphasise that something is done so often that it is characteristic of a person, group or thing:
 A: I think I’ll stay here after all.   B: You’re constantly changing your mind.
 Jacob is a really kind person. He ’s always offering to help me with my work.
We often use this pattern to indicate disapproval. The past continuous is used in a similar way with 
these adverbs (e.g. Was Olivia always asking you for money, too?). 
We can use the present continuous to describe something we regularly do at a certain time:
 At eight o’clock I ’m usually driving to work, so phone me on my mobile.
 Seven o’clock is a bit early. We ’re generally eating then.
D
E
Unit
A
B
C
We also use the present simple and present continuous in live commentaries (for example, on sports 
events) when the report takes place at the same time as the action: 
 King serves to the left-hand court and Adams makes a wonderful return. She’s playing 
magniﬁ cent tennis in this match ...
We can use the present simple in phrases such as It says here, I hear, I gather, I see, I understand 
and They say, (Someone) says, (Someone) tells me to introduce news that we have heard, read, 
seen (e.g. on television), or been told. We can also use past tenses (e.g. It said here, I heard):
 I gather you’re worried about Pedro.
 Sophia tells me you’re thinking of emigrating. 
 Professor Hendriks is at the conference and I hear she’s an excellent speaker.
Present continuous and present simple 2
2
Reminder ➜ A1–A5
We can use the present simple to refer to the contents of books, ﬁ lms, newspapers, etc:
 Thompson gives a list of the largest European companies in Chapter 6.
 At the beginning of the book, three men ﬁ nd $4 million in a crashed plane.
 In the ﬁ  lm, Loni Baranski takes the role of a private detective.
SECOND QUAKE HITS JAPAN
FOREIGN MINISTER RESIGNS
SCIENTISTS FIND ICE ON THE MOON
FIRE BREAKS OUT IN HOTEL ROOM
4
We often use the present simple and present continuous in stories and jokes 
in informal spoken English to create the impression that events are happening 
now. This can make them more direct and exciting and hold people’s attention:
 She goes up to this man and looks straight into his eyes. He’s not wearing his glasses, and he 
doesn’t recognise her …
 This man ’s playing golf when a kangaroo bounds up to him, 
grabs his club and hits his ball about half a mile …
The main events are usually described in sequence using the 
present simple and longer background events are described 
using the present continuous. 
In narratives and anecdotes the present simple can be used 
to highlight an event. Often it is used after past tenses and 
with a phrase such as suddenly or all of a sudden:
 I was sitting in the park, reading a newspaper, when all of a sudden this dog jumps at me.
Unit
5
Exercises
2. 1  Complete these sentences using the verbs in brackets. Use the present simple or present 
continuous. A & B
1 Rodriguez passes  to Messi who  just over the bar. Barcelona 
 much more in this half … (pass – shoot – attack)
2 A man  home late one night after the ofﬁ ce Christmas party. His wife 
 for him, and she  to him … (arrive – wait – say)
3 I went to a concert yesterday in the Town Hall. In the middle of it, while the orchestra 
 this man suddenly  on his seat and  to 
conduct them. (play – stand – start)
2.2  Complete what each person says about the news they have read or heard using the present 
tense phrases in C. C
1 I see  the government’s giving the health 
service a lot more money.
2  Vegecorp are going to 
3 
 we’re going to have 
4  Bruno’s 
5  she’s 
6  they’ve identiﬁ ed 
2.3  Expand one of the sets of notes below to complete each dialogue. E
continually / change / mind        forever / moan / work        forever / ask me / money        
constantly / criticise / driving         always / complain / handwriting 
1 A: I can’t read this.   B: You’re always complaining about my handwriting.  
2 A: Can I borrow €10?   B: You’re  .
3 A: That was a dangerous thing to do.   B: You’re  .
4 A: I think I’ll stay here after all.   B: You’re  .
5 A: I had a bad day at the ofﬁ ce again.   B: You’re  .
2.4  Complete each pair of sentences using the same verb (in negative form if necessary). Use the 
present continuous or the present simple. Use  to add any words outside the gap. D & E
1 a A: Shall I phone at six?   B: No, we usually  dinner at that time.
 b I  lamb, thanks. I’m a vegetarian. 
2 a Gielman  Henry V in the latest production at the Royal Theatre.
 b They constantly  loud music until the early hours of the morning.
3 a  I normally  the children to school at 8:30. Perhaps we could meet at 9:00.
 b In his 2007 book, Wall  a controversial view of Britain’s role in the war.
➜ Additional exercise 1 (page 240)
2
Government gives health service billions
Vegecorp to sack 1,000 workers.
President Cartman announced a new 
public holiday on his birthday, August 
6th. He made the announcement …
I’ve got a new job. 
Julia
Ed
Did you hear that Bruno’s 
crashed his car again?
A team of researchers claims 
to have identiﬁ ed a gene which 
causes some people to overeat.
Unit
A
B
C
D
E
With time clauses introduced by after, when, until, as soon as, once, by the time and the time 
expressions the minute / second / moment the past simple refers to past, completed events and the 
present perfect refers to future events. Compare these examples:
 After she left hospital (past), she had a long holiday. and
 After Lucas has left school (future), he will be spending six months in India.
 The minute I got the news about Anna (past) I telephoned my parents. and
 I’ll contact you the minute I’ve got my exam results. (future)
In the time clause in sentences like this it is possible to use the past perfect instead of the past simple 
(e.g. After she had left …) and the present simple instead of the present perfect (e.g. After Lucas 
leaves …) with the same meaning (see also Unit 5).
In news reports, you will often read about or hear recent events introduced with the present perfect, 
and then the past simple or other past tenses are used to give details:
After the pattern It / This / That is / will be the ﬁ rst time … we generally use the present perfect in 
the next clause:
 That’s the ﬁ rst time I’ve seen Jan look embarrassed. (reporting a past event)
 It won’t be the ﬁ rst time she has voted against the government. (talking about a future event)
Note that after It / This / That was the ﬁ rst time … we generally use the past perfect (see Unit 5):
 It was the ﬁ  rst time I’d talked to Dimitra outside the ofﬁ ce.
In a sentence which includes a time clause with since, we generally prefer a past simple verb in the 
time clause and a present perfect verb in the main clause. The time clause refers to a particular point 
in the past:
 Since Mr Dodson became president unemployment has increased. (rather than … has 
become …)
 She hasn’t been able to play tennis since she broke her arm. (rather than … has broken …)
Note, however, that we use the present perfect in the time clause if the two situations described in the 
main clause and time clause extend until the present:
 Have you met any of your neighbours since you’ve lived here? (not … you lived …)
6
Time expressions that refer to the present, such as this morning / week / 
month and today, can be used with either past simple or present perfect verbs. 
If we think of this morning (etc.) as a past, completed time period, then we use the past simple; if 
we think of this morning (etc.) as a time period which includes the present moment, then we use the 
present perfect. Compare:
 I didn’t shave this morning. (= the morning is over and I didn’t shave) and
 I haven’t shaved this morning. (= it is still the morning and I might shave later)
Past simple and present perfect
3
Reminder ➜ A6–A12
 An American woman has become the ﬁ rst person 
to make 2 million contributions to Wikipedia. 
Esther Miller began editing the site eight years ago. 
 A Russian spacecraft has returned safely to Earth with its two 
passengers. US astronaut Scott Keane and Russian cosmonaut 
Olga Kaleri landed in the early hours of Wednesday.
Unit
7
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 2 (page 241)
3
3. 1  Complete each sentence with a verb from the box. Use the present perfect or past simple, with 
a negative form where necessary. A
have        go        oversleep        read        spend        wear
1 A: Shall I make us some dinner? It’s already eight o’clock.  
 B:  No, thanks. I  to the dentist this afternoon and my mouth hurts too much to eat 
anything. 
2 I  three lectures today and I still have two more later this afternoon. 
3 It was so hot today that I  shorts and a T-shirt at work.
4 We  £200 on food this month and there’s another week to go before I get paid. 
5 A: Do you want a lift home?  
 B: No, I  this morning because my alarm clock didn’t go off, so I need to work late. 
6 I  much of the report yet, but I have to ﬁ nish it by the weekend. 
3.2  Complete the sentences with the pairs of verbs from the box. Choose the most appropriate 
tense — present perfect or past simple. B
be able – feel        happen – speak        improve – be        
not want – fall        rescue – be        work – not have
1 Maria  to go swimming since she  in the river.
2 Since she  at the company she  a day off through illness. 
3 Since he  the girl from a house ﬁ re, he  on TV almost every day. 
4 A lot  since I last  to you. 
5 Since I  to drive I  much more independent 
6 Stefan’s reading  enormously since he  at school.
3.3  One sentence in each pair is wrong. Correct it by replacing the past simple with the present 
perfect of the italicised verb. C
1 a Remember that after you signed the contract you won’t be able to change your mind.
 b Carlo’s injury only became apparent after he signed to play for Real Madrid. 
2 a As soon as I ﬁ nished college I want to travel around Australia. 
 b I didn’t have time to check the essay. I handed it in as soon as I ﬁ nished it. 
3 a By the time Sarah got to work the meeting had ﬁ nished. 
 b I’ll probably have ﬁ  nished breakfast by the time the children got up. 
4 a I recognised her the moment I heard her laugh. 
 b I’ll tell you what time we’re coming the moment I heard from Emil. 
3.4  Here are some extracts from a television news report. Choose the more appropriate tense – 
present perfect or past simple – for the verbs in brackets. D & E
1 When President Nelson arrives  (arrive) in Paris this evening, it will be the ﬁ rst time she 
 (visit) Europe since her election victory in May. 
2 The Victoria Hospital in Milltown  (close) to new patients after more cases of 
food poisoning. Three elderly patients  (die) last week in the outbreak.
3 The rate of inﬂ ation  (drop) to 4.8%. It’s the ﬁ rst time in nearly two years that 
the rate  (fall) below 5%. 
4 Nearly 600 laptops  (steal) from Ministry of Defence staff over the past ﬁ ve 
years. However, a spokesperson  (insist) that there had been no security 
problems as none of the computers  (hold) secret information.

Unit
A
B
C
D
Past continuous and past simple
We often use the past simple in a narrative (e.g. a report or a story) to talk about a single complete 
past event and the past continuous to describe the situation that existed at the time. The event might 
have interrupted the situation, or happened while the situation was in progress:
 Erika dropped her bag while she was getting into her car. 
 She was shaking with anger as she left the hotel. 
We can use either the past continuous or past simple (or past perfect; see Unit 5E) with some verbs to 
talk about things we intended to do but didn’t:
 We were meaning to call in and see you, but Marc wasn’t feeling well. (or We meant …)
Also: consider + -ing, expect to, hope to, intend to, plan to / on + -ing, think about / of + -ing, want to
These verbs (with the exception of mean and expect) and wonder about can also be used with the 
present and past continuous to report what we might do in the future. The past continuous is less 
deﬁ nite than the present continuous:
 I was thinking of going to China next year, but it depends how much money I’ve got. (less 
deﬁ nite than I’m thinking of going …)
 We were wondering about inviting Eva over tomorrow. (less deﬁ nite than We’re wondering 
about …)
We usually use the past simple rather than the past continuous to talk about repeated past actions:
 We went to Spain three times last year.
 Did you drive past her house every day?
However, we can use the past continuous, particularly in spoken English, when we want to emphasise 
that repeated actions went on for a limited and temporary period of past time:
 When Kata was in hospital, we were visiting her twice a day. (or … we visited …)
 To lose weight before the race, I wasn’t eating any biscuits for weeks. (or … I didn’t eat …)
or to talk about something that happened surprisingly often:
 Last week I was having to bring work home every night to get it all done. (or … had …)
 When the builders were here I was making them cups of tea all the time. (or … made …)
8
4
When we talk about two events or activities that went on over the same 
period of past time, we can often use the past continuous or the past simple 
for both:
 Mia was reading to the children while 
Ben was washing up. (or … read … washed up.)
Using the past continuous emphasises that the event or 
activity (‘was reading’) was in progress during the past 
period of time (‘while Ben was washing up’). Compare:
 When I was learning / learned to drive I was living 
with my parents. 
Was learning emphasises that the activity was in progress (‘I had lessons during this time’) and 
learned emphasises completion (‘I passed my test during this time’).
When we talk about two or more past completed events that followed one another, we use the past 
simple, not the past continuous, for both (see also Unit 5C):
 She got up when the alarm clock went off. 
Reminder ➜ A6–A8, A13
was reading / read
past now
was washing up / washed up
Unit
9
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 1 (page 240)
4
4. 1  Complete the sentences using these pairs of verbs. Use the past simple in one gap and the past 
continuous in the other. A–D
come – show         get – go         hope – give        live – spend        
look – see        play – break        start – check in
1 Just as I was getting  into the bath all the lights  went  off. 
2 I  to go away this weekend, but my boss  me some work that I 
have to ﬁ nish by Monday.
3  When I  in Paris, I  three hours a day travelling to and from 
work.
4 A friendly American couple  chatting to him as he  at the hotel  
reception.
5 I bumped into Lena last week. She  a lot better than when I last 
 her.
6 My boss  into the ofﬁ ce just as 
I  everyone my holiday photos.
7 I  badminton four times a week 
before I  my ankle.
I (1)  (buy) a new alarm clock the other day in Taylor’s the jewellers, when I 
actually (2)  (seeVRPHERG\VKRSOLIWLQJ,¶GMXVW¿QLVKHGSD\LQJIRUP\FORFN
and as I (3)  (turn) round, an elderly woman (4)  (slowly put) a 
silver plate into a bag that she (5)  (carry). Then she (6)  (walk) 
over to another part of the shop and (7)  (pick up) an expensive-looking watch 
a number of times. When she (8)  (thinkWKDWQRERG\  (look), 
she (10)  (drop) it into the bag. Before I (11)  (have) a chance to 
tell the staff in the shop, she (12)  (notice) that I (13)  (watch) 
her and (14)  (hurryRXW8QIRUWXQDWHO\IRUKHUWZRSROLFHRI¿FHUV
(15)   (walk) past just at that moment and she (16)  (run) straight 
into them.
 This time, use the same tense, either past simple or past continuous, in both spaces.
add – taste        go off – light        not listen – explain        push – run        not watch – dream
8 The smoke alarm  when he  a candle underneath it.
9 I can’t remember how to answer this question. I must confess that I  while the 
teacher  it to us.
 10 She  more salt to the soup, and then it  much better.
 11 Although the television was on, I  it. Instead I  about my 
holidays.
 12 She  open the door and  into the room. 
4.2  Look again at numbers 1, 4, 7 and 11 in 4. 1. Which of these sentences could have both verbs in 
the past simple? What difference in meaning, if any, would there be? 
4.3  Complete this email with either the past simple or the past continuous form of the verbs in 
brackets. Where alternatives are possible, think about any difference in meaning. A–C

Unit
A
B
C
D
E
Past perfect and past simple
The past perfect is often used in reporting what was originally said or thought in the present perfect or 
past simple (see also Unit 35): 
Talking about a past event Reporting this past event 
 ‘I have met him before.’  I was sure that I had met him before.  
(not … I met him …)
 ‘The village hasn’t changed much.’  I found that the village hadn’t changed 
much. (not … the village didn’t change …)
 ‘225 people drowned in the recent ﬂ oods.’  Police said that 225 people had drowned in 
the recent ﬂ oods. (or … drowned …)
 ‘I stole the watch.’  She admitted that she had stolen the 
watch. (or … stole …)
We can use either the past perfect or past simple (and often past continuous and past perfect 
continuous; see Units 4 and 7) when we talk about things that we intended to do, but didn’t or won’t 
now do in the future:
 I had hoped to visit the gallery before I left Florence, but it’s closed on Mondays. (or I hoped 
…, I was hoping …, I had been hoping …)
 Aron planned to retire at 60, but we have persuaded him to stay for a few more years. 
(or Aron had planned …, Aron was planning …, Aron had been planning …)
When we understand that we are talking about events before another 
past event, we don’t have to continue using the past perfect: 
 We bought a new car last month. We’d driven my parents’ old car for ages, but it started 
(or had started) to fall apart. We put (or had put) a new engine in it, but that didn’t solve 
(or hadn’t solved) the problems we were having.
If the order of past events is clear from the context (for example, if time expressions make the order 
clear) we can often use either the past perfect or the past simple: 
 After Ivan had ﬁ nished reading, he put out the light. (or … Ivan ﬁ nished …)
 The two leaders agreed to meet, even though earlier talks had failed to reach an agreement. 
(or … talks failed …)
When we give an account of a sequence of past events we usually 
put these events in chronological order using the past simple. If we 
want to refer to an event out of order – that is, an event which happened before the last event in the 
sequence we have written or spoken about – we can use the past perfect. Study the use of the past 
perfect and past simple in the text on the right:
Order of events: 1 gave present 2 wrote email 
3 made mistake 4 realised mistake
Order events 
are mentioned:
1 wrote email 2 had given present 
(out of order) 3 realised mistake 
4 had made mistake (out of order)
5
10
Reminder ➜ A6–A8, A14–A15
I wrote Clara an email to thank her 
for the present she had given me 
for my birthday last week. But as 
soon as I pressed the ‘send’ button, I 
realised that I had made a mistake 
and sent it to her sister instead. 
Unit
11
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 3 (page 241)
5
5. 1  The events mentioned in the magazine article are listed below. Write the order in which the 
events are mentioned and then the order in which they occurred (or were thought to occur). 
Compare the two lists and consider why the past perfect (in italics) was used. A & B
events order events are 
mentioned in text
order of events
I moved …
I learnt …
The property developer decided …
I heard …
I ﬁ rst saw the old house
A property developer bought it
I nearly gave up…
I put together enough money…
It was empty
2
1
2
1
5.2  Underline the correct options. In some cases only one is correct, and in others both are correct. 
C & D
1 As Jonas was introduced to Mrs Lopez, he realised that he had met / met her before.
2 During the previous week, I had been / went to the gym every evening. 
3 He denied that he had taken / took the money from the ofﬁ ce. 
4 I thought it was the best ﬁ lm I had seen / saw in my life.
5 The boy told me that he had lost / lost his train ticket and didn’t know how he would get home.
6 At the conference, scientists reported that they had found / found a cure for malaria.
7 The teacher guessed that some of the children had cheated / cheated in the exam.
8 She said that she had made up / made up her mind who to vote for, and that I couldn’t persuade 
her to change. 
9 Thomas explained that he had gone / went home early because he felt ill. 
 10 When I asked Maria about Jakub, she admitted that she hadn’t heard / didn’t hear from him for 
ages. 
 11 The waiter took my plate away before I had ﬁ nished / ﬁ nished eating. 
 12 Julia said she didn’t want any dinner. Apparently, she had eaten / ate already.
5.3  Expand these sets of notes using the past perfect to begin each sentence. E
I / expect / operation / painful         I / hope / leave / by nine 
He / not mean / insult / her        Lara / not intend / become / dentist        
I / not think of / cook rabbit
1 I had hoped to leave by nine  , but I overslept and missed the train.
2  ; she always wanted to be a vet.
3  , but I didn’t feel a thing. 
4  , until Andrei told me how tasty it was.
5  , but Daria was very offended.
How I bought my dream house
When I ﬁ rst saw the old house I had just moved to the area. It had been 
empty for about a year and was beginning to need some repairs, but 
the house was exactly what I wanted. But by the time I had put together 
enough money I learnt that a property developer had bought it and 
planned to turn it into a hotel. Six months later I had nearly given up hope 
of ﬁ nding anywhere to live in the village when I heard that the house was 
for sale again. The property developer had decided to invest his money 
in a new housing development on the edge of the village. I bought the 
house immediately and I’ve lived there happily ever since. 
 Carla Bridges
Unit
A
B
C
Present perfect continuous and present perfect
The present perfect continuous emphasises that an activity is ongoing and repeated, while the present 
perfect suggests the activity happened only once or on a speciﬁ ed number of occasions:
 Miguel has been kicking a football against the wall all day. (more likely than … has kicked …)
 He has played for the national team in 65 matches so far. (not He has been playing for the 
national team in 65 matches so far.)
Compare:
 The workers have been calling for the chairman’s resignation. (= emphasises a number of 
times, probably over an extended period) and
 Workers have called for management to begin negotiations on pay. (= maybe a number of 
times or only once.)
We often use the present perfect or the present perfect continuous to talk about something that 
has recently ﬁ nished if we can still see its results. However, we generally use the present perfect 
continuous with verbs that suggest extended or repeated activity. Compare:
 He ’s broken his ﬁ nger and is in a lot of pain. (not He’s been breaking …) and
 I ’ve been playing squash and need a shower! (more likely than I’ve played …) 
We use the present perfect continuous rather than the present perfect when we draw a conclusion 
from what we can see, hear, etc. We often use this form to complain or criticise: 
 Who ’s been messing around with my papers? They’re all over the place. 
 You ’ve been eating chocolate, haven’t you? There’s some on your shirt.
When we talk about the result of circumstances or an activity, we use the present perfect, rather than 
the present perfect continuous. When we focus on the process we often use either the present perfect 
or the present perfect continuous. Compare:
 Prices have decreased by 7%. (not Prices have been decreasing by 7%.) and
 Prices have been decreasing recently. (or Prices have decreased …)
 I ’ve used three tins of paint on the kitchen walls. (not I’ve been using three tins of paint on the 
kitchen walls.) and
 I ’ve been using a new kind of paint on the kitchen walls. (or I’ve used …)
6
12
We use the present perfect continuous to express the idea of an 
activity (a task, piece of work, etc.) in progress until recently or until 
the time of speaking: 
 Have you been working in the garden all day? You look exhausted.
 She ’s been writing the book since she was in her twenties and at last it’s ﬁ nished. 
Reminder ➜ A9–A12, A16–A17
now
Note that we often use time expressions to say how long the activity has been in progress.
We don’t use the present perfect continuous with verbs such as belong, know, (dis)like, and 
understand that describe unchanging states:
 Have you known each other long? (not Have you been knowing …) 
 I haven’t liked ice cream since I ate too much and was sick. (not I haven’t been liking …)
When we talk about situations (general characteristics or circumstances) that exist until the present 
we can often use either the present perfect or present perfect continuous:
 We ’ve been looking forward to this holiday for ages. (or We’ve looked forward to …)
Unit
13
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 2 (page 241)
6
6. 1  Complete each pair of sentences using the same verb. Use the present perfect in one sentence 
and the present perfect continuous in the other. Use negative forms where appropriate. A–C
disappear        give        put        read        stay        stop        swim
1 a Martina Gonzalez  in a rented ﬂ at since returning to Buenos Aires. 
 b We  at this hotel a couple of times before. 
2 a All day, the police  motorists to question them about the accident. 
 b Good, the noise  . I can start concentrating on my work again.
3 a I  any of Dickens’ novels. 
 b I  this book on astrophysics for hours and I’m still only on page six.
 4 a Dr Fletcher  the same lecture to students for the last ten years. 
 b Mr Sato  nearly a million pounds to the charity this year. 
5 a I did 20 lengths of the pool today. I  that far since I was at school. 
 b I  and I feel exhausted. 
6 a In recent years, companies  increasing resources into internet marketing. 
 b The South African coal company  the Calverton Mine up for sale. 
7 a An important ﬁ  le  from my ofﬁ ce.
 b Plants and vegetables  from my garden since we had new neighbours. 
6.2  Here are two views on the government’s announcement that it is to cut the money it gives to 
the Inﬂ uenza Research Centre. If necessary, correct the present perfect continuous verbs using 
either the present perfect or past simple. A–C and Unit 3
a Dr Petra Adams, the Director of the Centre
b Sabir Khan, the Opposition spokesperson for science
The previous government (1) has been investing huge amounts 
of money into the Centre and I think it’s terrible that the present 
government (2) has been announcing this cut when the number of 
cases of inﬂ uenza (3) has been increasing. The Centre (4) has been 
running successfully for many years. But this decision is just typical of 
this government. It (5) has been neglecting health research ever since 
it was elected, and (6) has been cutting back on spending on science 
generally. Although the government says that the cut is necessary 
because of the recent world economic problems, I (7) have been 
ﬁ nding evidence that they (8) have been planning this for some time. 
I (9) have been speaking to the Minister about this yesterday and 
(10) have also been writing to the Prime Minister demanding that the 
decision should be reversed.
It’s remarkable to think that since 1950 inﬂ uenza (1) has been 
claiming more than 50,000 lives in this country, and in 1957 alone 
around 6,000 people (2) have been dying. But over the last 20 years 
we at the Centre (3) have been making considerable progress on 
understanding the illness. We (4) have been producing over a hundred 
books and articles reporting the results of our research and in 2012 
they (5) have been awarding the Nobel Prize for medicine to one of 
my colleagues. In our more recent work we (6) have been looking 
into the effects of inﬂ uenza on heart disease and we (7) have also 
been exploring a possible link between climate change and the recent 
increase in the number of cases of inﬂ uenza. It is a tragedy that the 
government (8) has been making this decision now.
Unit
A
B
C
D
E
Remember that we don’t describe states with continuous tenses (see Unit 1), and we use the past 
perfect, not the past perfect continuous, even when we focus on the length of a situation up to a 
particular past time:
 We had only owned the car for six weeks when the clutch broke. (not We had been owning 
the car for six weeks …)
The past perfect continuous is mainly used in written texts and is less common in speech. Here is an 
example in a newspaper article:
 The body of a climber who went missing in the Alps was ﬁ  nally found yesterday. Carl Sims had 
been climbing alone near the Harz Waterfall, which has claimed many lives in the past. 
If we talk about how many times something happened in a period up to a particular past time, we use 
the past perfect, not the past perfect continuous:
 How many times had you met him before yesterday? (not How many times had you been 
meeting …)
 I had stayed in the hotel twice in the 1990s. (not I had been staying in the hotel twice …)
The past perfect continuous can be used to talk about a situation or activity that went on before a 
particular past time and (i) ﬁ nished at that time, (ii) continued beyond it, or (iii) ﬁ nished shortly 
before it: 
 (i) We ’d been driving for about an hour when the engine suddenly stopped.
 (ii)  She felt terrible during the interview because she had been suffering from ﬂ u since the 
previous day.
 (iii) When I last saw Omar, he’ d been running and was out of breath. 
If we are not interested in how long the activity went on, we can use the past continuous instead of 
the past perfect continuous. Compare:
 When the merger was announced it became apparent that the two companies had been 
discussing the possibility since last year. and
 A friend told me about a conversation she’d recently overheard. Two women were discussing 
their holiday plans … 
 I ﬁ  rst met Mateo and Lucia when they had been going out together for ﬁ ve years, and they 
didn’t get married for another three years after that. and
 Karin met Lars when she was going out with his best friend. 
7
14
Past perfect continuous, past perfect and 
past continuous
We use the past perfect continuous to talk about something that was in 
progress recently before or up to a past point in time, and the past 
perfect when we talk about a ﬁ nished activity before a past time:
 I ’d been ﬁ nishing some work in the garden when Lea arrived, so I didn’t hear her come in. 
(not I’d ﬁ nished some work in the garden when Lea arrived, so I didn’t hear her come in.) and
 I ’d ﬁ nished all the ironing so I started cleaning the windows. (not I’d been ﬁ nishing all the 
ironing so I started cleaning the windows.)
We can often use either the past perfect continuous or the past perfect with a similar meaning:
 I ’d been working / I’d worked hard all year, so I felt that I deserved a holiday. 
had been ﬁ nishing
past now
had ﬁ nished
past now
Reminder ➜ A14–A15, A18
Unit
15
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 3 (page 241)
7
7.1  Complete each pair of sentences using one verb from the box. Use the past perfect continuous 
if possible; if not, use the past perfect. A
apply        carry        ﬂ y        work
1 a  She  only  for the company for a couple of months, 
so I was surprised to hear that she’d left. 
 b  She  ﬁ nally  her way up from trainee to a 
management position, and she celebrated her promotion with a big party. 
2 a  The avalanche  them 500 metres down the mountain but no one was 
hurt.
 b She took a bottle from the bag she  all the way from home.
3 a  We  for visas early, but still hadn’t got them by the week before the 
holiday.
 b She  for jobs, without success, since leaving university. 
4 a He  all the way from New York to be at yesterday’s meeting.
 b  When the plane was diverted, shortly after take-off, it  from London to 
Frankfurt. 
7. 2  Use the past perfect continuous form of the verb in brackets if appropriate; if not, use the past 
perfect. B–D
1 Mrs Bishop  to have children for years, and only became pregnant at the age 
of 45. (try)
2 This was the ﬁ rst time we had been to the castle, even though we  Prague a 
few times before. (visit)
3 She bought her ﬁ rst watch at the age of eight. It  two pounds. (cost) 
4 Emma Willems  novels for ten years before she published her ﬁ rst book. 
(write)
5 For some time Daniel  about passing the exams and eventually decided to 
change the course he was taking. (worry)
6 My teacher was really annoyed with me. It was the third time I  late for 
school that week. (arrive)
7 I  always  it would be easy to get a job, and was 
disappointed to be rejected. (believe)
8 We  about Sarah when, to our amazement, she walked through the door. 
(talk)
 In which one of the sentences where you have used the past perfect continuous do you think 
the past continuous is more likely? C  
7. 3  Study this conversation extract. If the italicised verbs are correct, write ✓. If they are wrong, 
correct them using either the past perfect (active or passive) or past perfect continuous. A–E
A: How was your weekend? 
B: Not great, actually. I (1) ’d really been looking forward to a relaxing couple of days. But early on 
Saturday morning Mum phoned to say that Dad (2) had been taking ill.
A: Oh, no! What (3) had happened?
B: She (4) had just been hearing that he (5) had been ﬂ own by helicopter to hospital in Edinburgh 
from a village called Contin where he (6) had ﬁ shed with my Uncle Mark.
A: And is he okay? What’s wrong with him?
B: Well, Uncle Mark said that Dad (7) had been complaining of a bad headache most of yesterday, 
but he (8) hadn’t been wanting to go back to the hotel and spoil the day. But then in the evening, 
just as they (9) had stopped ﬁ shing for the day, he (10) had been collapsing…
Unit
A
B
C
Present and past time: review
Combinations of perfect and continuous
We combine the perfect and continuous forms in the present perfect continuous to describe an 
activity in progress either at or recently before the time of speaking, and possibly beyond it:
 I have been following the discussions on the forum with great interest. 
We can also use the present perfect continuous to talk about activities that have recently ﬁ nished 
with some result that can be seen, heard, etc.:
 Look at the dirt on your clothes! Have you been digging in the garden again?
The past perfect continuous has a similar meaning. However, the point of reference is not ‘now’ 
(as it is with the present perfect continuous) but a point in the past:
 When we met Lena and Marko, they had been riding.
 It had been snowing heavily for hours and when I went to the door I couldn’t open it. 
Perfect 
We use perfect verb forms to describe one event or state from the point of view of a later time. The 
present perfect suggests a connection between something that happened in the past and the present 
time. Note, however, that the situation or event does not have to continue until the time of speaking, 
only to have some connection or relevance to the present time:
 I ’ve ﬁ nished that book you wanted, so you can borrow it now.
 Have you turned the heating off? I don’t like it to be on when I’m not at home.
 Your nose is bleeding. Has somebody hit you?
The past perfect is used to locate a past event before another past event:
 I invited him out to dinner, but he said he had already eaten.
 By the time I picked up the phone, they had rung off. 
Continuous and simple
When we focus on an activity itself, starting before and continuing up to (and possibly beyond) a 
particular point of time, rather than focusing on actions as completed events, we use continuous forms:
 Ingrid can’t come to the phone. She ’s washing her hair. 
 As you ’re not using your car at the moment, can I borrow it?
 This time yesterday I was ﬂ ying over the Paciﬁ c. 
 Was she wearing that red dress when you saw her?
We use simple forms to talk about general situations, habits, and things that are or were always true: 
 When I worked as a postman I got up at three o’clock every morning. 
 Miguel doesn’t play golf very well.
 These birds build their nests on the ground. 
 The earthquake struck the area at midday yesterday. (past simple for completed events)
We use simple forms with verbs that describe unchanging states (that stay the same):
 She intends to work hard at school and go on to university. 
 Did you understand the instructions we were given?
However, we can use continuous forms with these verbs when they describe something happening or 
changing:
 She was intending to talk to Tony about the idea, but she didn’t get the opportunity. 
 I ’m understanding physics much better now that Mr Davies is teaching us. 
8
16
Reminder ➜ Section A
Unit
17
Exercises
 8
8.3  Here is the rest of the conversation in Exercise 7 .3. If the italicised verb is correct, write ✓. 
If it is wrong, correct it using the past simple, present perfect, past perfect, present perfect 
continuous or past perfect continuous. A–C
A: (1) Did he have any health problems recently?
B: Well, he (2) ’s been suffering from stress for some time, but we (3) have thought a holiday in 
Scotland would be relaxing for him. He (4) worked too hard for months, and we (5) ’ve been 
trying to persuade him to have a break for ages before he agreed. 
A: So (6) have you gone up to Scotland when you (7) have heard?
B: No, Mum (8) has gone up to be with him, but the doctors (9) have checked him over and (10) had 
been saying that it’s not too serious. They (11) gave him some medicine to bring down his blood 
pressure and (12) had told him that he needs complete rest for a couple of months. So Mum’s 
driving him back in the car tomorrow.
A: Well, send him my best wishes when you speak to him.
B: Thanks, I will do.
RONSON SACKED IN UNITED CUTS
Aston United (1) have sacked  (sack) 
their manager, Neil Ronson. The former England 
football international (2)  (say) that he 
(3)  (hear) the news when he 
(4)  (return) from a three-week holiday 
in Spain and that it (5)  (come) as a 
complete shock. ‘There (6)  (be) no 
hint of any problem when I (7)  (leave) 
for the holiday.’ Aston United (8)  
(appoint) Ronson as manager two years ago and 
last season they (9)  (finish) second in 
the First Division. However, they (10)  
(win) only five matches so far this season. The 
chairman of the club, Peter White, last night  
(11)  (accuse) Ronson of lack of 
commitment to the club. ‘Neil’s attitude 
(12)  (disappoint) us recently. Over the 
last few months he (13)  (spend) more 
time on Spanish beaches than working with the 
players in Aston.’
I (1) am writing  this blog in a hotel room in Perth. I (2)  here a couple 
of hours ago after a long coach journey from Adelaide. I (3)  pretty tired so 
this will only be a short post before I (4)  to sleep. As you (5)  , I 
(6)  last week in Adelaide with Ruby. I (7)  her a month or so ago 
to tell her when I would be arriving, and she (8)  at the airport for me when 
, WKHUH)RUWKH¿UVWIHZGD\V,  quite jet-lagged, but I 
soon (11)  over that after a few days of lazing around on the beach. Ruby 
(12)  living in Adelaide a lot, although she (13)  for a new job 
just now. It (14)  that she (15)  very well with her colleagues. 
Apparently they constantly (16)  about the working conditions and it 
(17)  to annoy Ruby. She (18)  me to pass on her best 
ZLVKHVWRDOOKHUROGIULHQGV6RQRZ,IRUZDUGWRH[SORULQJ
Perth. I (20)  ......................... it’s a wonderful place. I’ll post again soon. Amy
8. 1  Amy is writing a blog for her friends and family as she travels around Australia. Use the present 
simple, present continuous, past simple or past continuous of the verbs in the box to complete 
the extract. A
 In 1–10 use: 
arrive        feel (×2)        get        go        know        spend        text        wait         write 
 In 11–20 use: 
ask        complain        enjoy        get        (not) get on        hear        look (×2)        seem        start
8.2  Complete this extract from a newspaper article using the past simple, present perfect or past 
perfect of the verbs in brackets. B

Unit
A
B
C
D
E
Will and be going to
To predict the future we often use will with I bet (informal), I expect, I hope, I imagine, I reckon 
(informal), I think, I wonder and I’m sure, and in questions with think and reckon:
 I imagine the stadium will be full for the match on Saturday.
 That cheese smells awful. I bet nobody will eat it. 
 When do you think you’ll ﬁ nish work? 
 Do you reckon he’ll say yes?
Be going to can also be used with these phrases, particularly in informal contexts. 
We use will when we make a decision at the moment of speaking and be going to for decisions about 
the future that have already been made. Compare:
 I ’ll pick him up at eight. (an offer; making an arrangement now) and
 I ’m going to collect the children at eight. (this was previously arranged)
 ‘Pineapples are on special offer this week.’ ‘In that case, I ’ll buy two.’ and
 When I’ve saved up enough money, I ’m going to buy a smartphone.
However, in a formal style, we use will rather than be going to to talk about future events that have 
been previously arranged in some detail. Compare:
 Are you going to talk at the meeting tonight? and
 The meeting will begin at 9 am. Refreshments will be available from 8:30 onwards. 
We can use will or be going to with little difference in meaning in the main clause of an if-sentence 
when we say that something (often something negative) is conditional on something else:
 You ’ll / You’re going to knock that glass over if you’re not careful.
When the future event does not depend on the action described in the if-clause, we use be going to, 
not will. This kind of sentence is mainly found in spoken English. Compare:
 I ’m going to open a bottle of lemonade, if you want some. (= I’m going to open a bottle of 
lemonade. Do you want some?) and
 I ’ll open a bottle of lemonade if you want some. (= If you say you want some, I’ll open it.) 
However, we use will, not be going to, when the main clause refers to offers, requests, promises, etc. 
and ability:
 If Erik phones, I ’ll let you know. (= an offer; ‘…, I’m going to let you know’ suggests ‘I intend to 
let you know when Erik phones’)
 If you look to your left, you ’ll see the lake. (= you’ll be able to see; ‘… you’re going to see …’ 
suggests ‘I know this is what you can see when you look to your left’)
and when one thing is the logical consequence of another: 
 If you don’t switch on the monitor ﬁ  rst, the computer won’t come on. 
We use will rather than be going to to make a prediction based on our opinion or experience:
 Why not come over at the weekend? The children will enjoy seeing you again.
 ‘Shall I ask Lamar?’ ‘No, she won’t want to be disturbed.’
We use be going to rather than will when we make a prediction based on some present evidence:
 The sky’s gone really dark. There ’s going to be a storm.
 ‘What’s the matter with her?’ ‘It looks like she ’s going to faint.’
We can use either will or be going to to talk about something that is 
planned, or something that we think is likely to happen in the future:
 We will study climate change in a later part of the course. (or We are going to study …)
 Where will you stay in Berlin? (or Where are you going to stay …?)
 The south of the city won’t be affected by the power cuts. (or … isn’t going to be affected …)
We often prefer be going to in informal contexts (see also D).
9
18
Reminder ➜ B1–B5
Unit
19
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 4 (page 242)
9
9. 1  Correct or improve the sentences where necessary by changing the italicised will (’ll) forms to 
be going to forms. A–D
1 Have you seen Nadia recently? She ’ll have another baby. ’s going to have
2 The method is quite simple, and I’m sure it will be familiar to most of you already. 
3 A: I can’t come over during the day.
 B: I’ll see you tomorrow evening, then. 
4  Are these new skis yours? Will you take up skiing? 
5 Wherever you go in Brazil, you ’ll ﬁ nd the people very friendly. 
6 Jamie says he ’ll be a politician when he grows up – and he’s only ﬁ ve years old! 
7 It’s getting very humid – we ’ll have a thunderstorm.  
8 I hear you ’ll sell your car. How much do you want for it?  
9 You can’t play football in the garden. I ’ll cut the grass. 
 10 A: What’s the matter with Paula?
  B: She says she ’ll be sick.
  A: She ’ll feel better with some fresh air. 
 11 A: I’ve been offered a new job in Munich, so I ’ll leave Camco. 
  B: When will you tell your boss? 
  A: I’m not sure. Perhaps I ’ll try to see him later today. 
 12 A: Did I tell you I ’ll have dinner with Karl on Thursday? 
  B: But we ’ll see a ﬁ lm with Hamid on Thursday. You’ve known about it for weeks. 
  A: Sorry. In that case, I ’ll sort out a different day with Karl.
 13 A: Did you get the theatre tickets? 
  B: No. I forgot all about them. I ’ll book them tomorrow.
 14 A: We’ve got small, medium and large. What size do you want?
  B: I ’m going to have a large one, please.
 15 A: Shall I give Ian another ring?
  B: Yes, I expect he ’ll be home by now.
 16 A: What are those bricks for? 
  B: I ’ll build a wall at the side of the garden.
9.2  Complete the sentences with will (’ll) or be going to and an appropriate verb. If both will and 
be going to are possible, write them both. E
1 If you want me to, I ’ll explain  how the equipment works.
2 If you want to help us, we  these trees at the bottom of the garden.
3 You  your back if you try to lift that box. 
4 If I give you the money  you  me some oranges when 
you’re out? 
5 If you press the red button, the machine  .  
6 I  Laura this weekend, if you’d like to come too. 
7 He’s been told that if he’s late once more he  .
8 If you listen carefully, you .  an owl in the trees over there.  

Unit
A
B
C
D
Present simple and present continuous for the future
Present continuous
We can often use either the present continuous or be going to with a similar meaning to talk about 
planned future events. The present continuous indicates that we have a ﬁ rm intention or have made a 
deﬁ nite decision to do something, although this may not already be arranged: 
 Are you seeing the doctor again next week? (or Are you going to see …?)
 I ’m not asking Tom to the party. (or I’m not going to ask …)
However, we don’t use the present continuous for the future –
 when we make or report predictions about activities or events over which we have no control (we can’t 
arrange these): 
 I think it ’s going to rain soon. 
 Scientists say that the satellite won’t cause any damage when it falls to Earth. 
 when we talk about permanent future situations:
 People are going to live / will live longer in the future. 
 Her new house is going to have / will have three ﬂ oors.
Many people avoid be going to + go / come and use the present continuous forms of go and come 
instead:
 I ’m going to town on Saturday. (rather than I’m going to go to town …)
 Are you coming home for lunch? (rather than Are you going to come …?)
We use the present simple, not will, to refer to the future –
 in time clauses with conjunctions such as after, as soon as, before, by the time, when, while, until:
 When you see Ben, tell him he still owes me some money. (not When you will see Ben …)
 I should be ﬁ  nished by the time you get back. (not … by the time you will get back.)
 in conditional clauses with if, in case, provided, and unless:
 Provided the right software is available, I should be able to solve the problem.
 I’ll bring some sandwiches in case we don’t ﬁ nd anywhere decent to eat. 
  when we talk about possible future events with suppose, supposing, and what if at the beginning of a 
sentence. Note that the past simple can be used with a similar meaning:
 Suppose we miss the bus – how will we get home? (or Suppose we missed …)
 What if the train’s late? Where shall I meet you then? (or What if the train was late?)
Present simple
We can often use either the present simple or will to talk about future events that are part of some 
timetabled or programmed arrangement or routine. However, we prefer the present simple for ﬁ xed, 
unchangeable events. Compare: 
 Does the sale ﬁ nish on Thursday or Friday? (or Will the sale ﬁ nish …?) and
 The sun rises at 5:16 tomorrow. (more likely than The sun will rise …)
We avoid the present simple when we talk about less formal or less routine arrangements, or 
predictions. Instead we use will, be going to, or the present continuous:
 Are you staying in to watch TV tonight, or are you coming dancing? (not Do you stay to 
watch TV tonight, or do you come…)
 It’s only a problem in Britain now, but it will affect the rest of Europe soon. (not … but it 
affects the rest of Europe soon.) 
10
20
Reminder ➜ B6 & B7
Unit
21
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 4 (page 242)
10
10. 1  If possible, use the present simple of a verb from the box to complete each sentence. If not, 
use will + inﬁ nitive. A–C
accept        change        get        give out        go        lend        look after        
miss        play        rain        read        start        stop        want
1 We  our exam results on the 20th August. 
2 Alex  our cats while we’re away next week. 
3 I think I’ll take an umbrella in case it  .
4 There is a reading list to accompany my lecture, which I  at the end. 
5 The new drug  on sale in the USA next year. 
6 The concert  at 7:30, not 7:15 as it says in the programme.
7 Provided it  raining, we’ll go for a walk this afternoon. 
8 What if I  my plans and decide to stay longer? Will I need to renew my visa? 
9 We  Mariam when she leaves, but she says she’ll keep in touch. 
 10 Unless my parents  me some money, I won’t be able to go on holiday this 
year. 
 11 Tonight France  Germany in a match important for both teams. 
 12 It is unlikely that the government  the court’s decision. 
 13 Supposing I  to upload a video to YouTube? How do I do that? 
 14 By the time you  this letter, I should be in New Zealand. 
10.2  Cross out any answers that are wrong or very unlikely. If two answers are possible, consider the 
difference in meaning, if any, between them. C, D & Unit 9
1 It’s not a deep cut, but it  a scar.
 a will leave b is going to leave c is leaving
2 Did you know I  a new car next week? 
 a will buy b am going to buy c am buying
3 A: I’m not sure how I’ll get to the concert. B: We can take you. We  you up at eight.
 a will pick b are going to pick c are picking 
4 I’m sorry I can’t come for dinner. I  to York tonight. 
 a will drive b am going to drive c am driving
5 The high-speed rail link  the journey time between the cities signiﬁ cantly.
 a will cut b is going to cut c is cutting
6 I have to go now. I  you back later today. 
 a will call b am going to call c am calling
7 Don’t go out now. I  lunch and it’ll be cold by the time you get back.
 a will serve b am going to serve c am serving
8 Unless help arrives within the next few days, thousands  .
 a will starve  b are going to starve  c are starving
10.3  Complete these dialogues with either present simple for the future or present continuous for 
the future using the verbs in brackets. If neither of these is correct, use will or be going to. 
Units 9 & 10
1 A: Simon Bianchi (1)  (join) us for dinner. You know, the novelist.
 B: Yes, I’ve read some of his books.
 A:  I’m sure you (2)  (like) him. His latest book (3)  
(come) out at the end of this week. If you want, I’m sure he (4)  (give) you 
a signed copy. 
2 A: Have you heard that BWM (1)  (sack) 300 workers? 
 B:  That’s bad news. Supposing they (2)  (close) completely – that would be  
awful. 
 A:  But I’ve heard that they (3)  (build) a new factory in Ireland. If you look on 
their website, you (4)  (see) a lot of information about it.
Unit
A
B
C
D
Future continuous and future perfect (continuous)
Future perfect and future perfect continuous: I will have done and I will have been 
doing
We use the future perfect to say that something will be ended, completed, or achieved by a particular 
point in the future:
 By the time you get home I will have cleaned the house from top to bottom.
 I’m sure his awful behaviour will soon have been forgotten. (= passive form)
We use the future perfect continuous to emphasise the duration of an activity in progress at a 
particular point in the future:
 Next year I will have been working in the company for 30 years.
With both the future perfect and future perfect continuous we usually mention the future time 
(e.g. By the time you get home …, Next year …).
The future continuous, future perfect and future perfect continuous can also be used to say what we 
believe or imagine is happening around now:
 We could ask to borrow Joe’s car. He won’t be using it today – he went to work by bike.
 Most people will have forgotten the ﬁ re by now.
 Tennis fans will have been queuing at Wimbledon all day to buy tickets.
We can use the future perfect continuous to say what we think was happening at a point in the past:
 Motorist Vicky Hesketh will have been asking herself whether speed cameras are a good idea 
after she was ﬁ ned £100 last week for driving at 33 mph in a 30 mph zone.
When we don’t want to indicate willingness, intention, invitation, etc., we prefer to use the future 
continuous instead of will. For example, if guests have stayed longer than you wanted, and you don’t 
know when they are leaving, you might ask:
 Will you be staying with us again tonight? (asking about their plans) rather than
 Will you stay with us again tonight? (they might think this is an invitation)
Future continuous: I will be doing
We can use the future continuous to talk about:
(i) something that is predicted to start before a particular point of future time, and that may continue 
after this point (often the result of a previous decision or arrangement):
 When it goes into orbit, the spacecraft will be carrying 30 kilos of plutonium.
 Anna will be helping us to organise the party. 
(ii) a future activity that is part of the normal course of events or that is one of a repeated or regular 
series of events:
 Dr Lin will be giving the same talk in room 103 at ten next Thursday.
 Will you be driving to work, as usual?
We can often use either the future continuous or the present continuous when we talk about arranged 
activities or events in the future (see also Unit 10). Compare:
 We will be leaving for Istanbul at 7:00 in the evening. (timetabled; or … are leaving …) and
 When the race starts later this afternoon the drivers will be hoping for drier weather than last 
year. (not … are hoping …; not reporting the details of a programme or timetable)
22
11
Reminder ➜ B8
Unit
23
Exercises
 11
11. 1  Complete both sentences in each pair with one verb from the box. Use the future continuous 
(will / won’t be + -ing) in one sentence and will / won’t + inﬁ nitive in the other. A & B
give        leave        move        use        work
1 a We  in an hour or so, so make sure your suitcase is packed.
 b Without more cheap housing, families  the village and ﬁ nd homes in town.
2 a  you  late at the ofﬁ ce again? I want to know when to cook.
 b A: We need to get this order sent out before Monday. 
  B: Well, I  over the weekend if that will help.
3 a I  my car until next week, so you can borrow it if you like.
 b My grandad  a computer. He says he’s very happy with his old typewriter.
4 a Is your suitcase very heavy? I  you a hand with it if you like.
 b Dr Sankey  evidence at the trial of James Morgan next week.
5 a He’s parked his car across our drive and says he  it. Shall I call the police?
 b The two schools  to a single campus at the beginning of September.
11.2  Make sentences with a beginning from (i), a verb from (ii) (either in the future perfect or future 
perfect continuous), and an ending from (iii).  C & D
(i) (ii) (iii)
1 The weather forecast says that 
the rain …
2 If the company is making a proﬁ t 
by the end of the year then we …
3 In two years’ time Morneau …
4 I am conﬁ dent that I …
5 This book on Proust is really 
difﬁ cult. On Saturday I …
6 As delegates who arrived early …
 act
 achieve
 clear 
 ﬁ nish 
 discover
 read 
  … the objective we set ourselves when we 
took over.
 … by the morning and tomorrow will be dry. 
  … for 50 years, and shows no sign of retiring 
from the theatre.
 … the report before the end of the week.
 … it for a month, and I’m still only half way.
  … there have been some late changes to the 
conference programme.
1 The weather forecast says that the rain will have cleared by the morning and  
 tomorrow will be dry.  
11.3  Here is part of an email from Emily, an English teacher in Japan, to her friend Rosa. Underline 
the correct option.  A & D
Hi Rosa
*UHHWLQJVIURP2VDND+RSHWKLV¿QGV\RXDOOZHOO,VXSSRVHE\QRZVFKRROwill close / will have closed 
IRU&KULVWPDVDQG\RXwill be enjoying / will have been enjoyingDUHVW,W¶VKDUGWREHOLHYHWKDW7LP¶V
DOUHDG\DQGWKDWLW¶VRQO\DIHZPRQWKVXQWLOKHwill be leaving / will have beenOHDYLQJVFKRROIRU
FROOHJH
0\PDLQQHZVLVWKDWP\EURWKHU-RHDQGKLVIDPLO\ will have been arriving / will be arriving  next 
)ULGD\DVSDUWRIWKHLUELJWULSDURXQGWKHZRUOG%\WKHWLPH WKH\JHWKHUHWKH\ will be going / will 
have beenWR&DOLIRUQLDDQG1HZ=HDODQG1RGRXEW-RH¶VFKLOGUHQwill have been planning / will plan 
LWDOORXWIRUPRQWKV7KH\won’t be spending / won’t have spentDOOWKHLUWLPHZLWKPH-RHKDVWRJR
WR7RN\RRQEXVLQHVVVR,will have kept / will be keepingWKHUHVWRIWKHIDPLO\HQWHUWDLQHGZKLOHKH¶V
DZD\7KHQWKH\will all be going / will all have been goingWR.\RWR«
Unit
A
B
C
Be to + inﬁ nitive; be about to + inﬁ nitive
We use be about to + inﬁ nitive mainly in conversation to say that something will (not) happen in the 
very near future:
 We ’re about to eat. Do you want to join us?
 Appearing on TV might make her famous, but it ’s not about to make her rich.
 A: Why don’t you switch it off and turn it back on again?     
B:  Yes, I was about to try that when you came in. 
(not Yes, I was to try …) (referring to the future 
from the past)
We often use be to + inﬁ nitive in if-clauses to say that something must happen ﬁ rst (in the main 
clause) before something else can happen (in the if-clause):
 If the human race is to survive, we must look at environmental problems now.
 The law needs to be revised if justice is to be done. (passive form)
Compare the use of be to + inﬁ nitive and the present simple for the future in if-clauses:
 If Lopez is to win gold at the next Olympics, he needs to work on his ﬁ tness. and
 If Lopez wins gold at the next Olympics, he has said that he will retire from athletics.
Note how the order of cause and effects in if-sentences is reversed with these two tenses:
 If Lopez is to win gold … (= effect), he needs to work … (= cause) and
 If Lopez wins gold … (= cause), he has said that he will retire … (= effect)
Be to + inﬁ nitive is commonly used in news reports to talk about events that are likely to happen in 
the near future:
 Police ofﬁ  cers are to visit every home in the area.
 The main Rome-to-Naples railway line is to be reopened today. (passive form)
It is also used to talk about formal or ofﬁ cial arrangements, formal instructions, and to give orders: 
 You are not to leave the school without my permission.
 The European Parliament is to introduce a new law on safety at work.
 Children are not to be left unsupervised in the museum. (passive form)
Passive forms are often used to make orders and instructions more impersonal.
Note that we only use be to + inﬁ nitive to talk about future events that can be controlled by people. 
Compare:
 In the next few years, thousands of speed cameras are to appear on major roads. (or … will 
appear …) and
 Scientists say they can’t predict when or where the disease will appear again. (not … the 
disease is to appear again; the appearance of the disease can’t be controlled)
 The President is to return to Brazil later today. (or … will return …) and
 The comet will return to our solar system in around 500 years. (not The comet is to return …; 
the movement of the comet can’t be controlled)
However, when be to + inﬁ nitive refers to the future from the past (see Unit 14B), we often use it to 
describe what happened to someone, whether they were able to inﬂ uence events or not:
 Matthew Flinders sailed past Tasmania in 1770, but it was to be a further 30 years before he 
landed there.
 Clare Atkins was to write two more books about her experiences in Africa before her death in 
1997 .
24
12

Unit
25
Exercises
 12
12. 1  Complete these news extracts using the verbs in brackets. Use be to + inﬁ nitive if possible and 
will + inﬁ nitive if not. Use active or passive forms as necessary. A
1 Jon Stobbard has written his ﬁ rst new play for 15 years. Its ﬁ rst performance 
 (stage) at the New Victoria Theatre.
2  The new safety system  (stop) trains automatically if they pass a 
danger signal.
3 Stafford Boys’ School  (merge) with the nearby Bicton Girls’ School to 
form a new co-educational establishment.
4 There are fears that sea levels  (rise) catastrophically in the next 50 
years.
5 The old design and technology programme  (replace) with a new 
computer science course. 
 Now use the verbs in the box to do the same in 6 to 10.
become        create        increase        receive        retire        succeed
6 Managing Director Lars Lindberg, 59,  this summer a year early. He 
 by Christina Fontana, who joined the company last year.
7 As the temperatures fall with the onset of winter, the refugee crisis  
more severe.
8 Production line staff at the Heathcote garden furniture factory in Northam 
 a pay rise following a big new order from Italy.
9 Seventy new posts  at the factory following a major investment by 
the parent company in the United States.
 10 The recent rapid rise in house prices in the south-east  the demand 
for higher salaries among lower-paid workers.
12.2  Underline the correct answers. In some cases both alternatives are possible. B & C
1 You need to work much harder if you have / are to have any chance of passing the exam.
2 My sister is to start / is about to start a PhD in Physics.
3 Mrs Patel is likely to become the Foreign Minister if the party wins / is to win power at the next 
election.
4 If you enjoy / are to enjoy romantic comedies, then this is a ﬁ lm you must see.
5  A: Can you type this letter for me? 
B: Sorry, I’m just to go / ’m just about to go home. It’ll have to wait until tomorrow.
6 If Beckman recovers / is to recover from a foot injury, it seems certain that he will play in 
Saturday’s match against Spain.
7 If the university keeps / is to keep its international reputation, it must ﬁ rst invest in better 
facilities for students.
8 Jonas Fischer has denied that he is to resign / is about to resign as marketing manager.
9 It started snowing an hour ago, and from the look of those clouds things are to get / are about to 
get a lot worse.
 10 If the railway system is improved / is to be improved, the government should invest substantial 
amounts of money now.

Unit
A
B
C
D
Other ways of talking about the future
When the phrases and verbs in A and B are used with past tense forms, they are usually concerned 
with future events seen from the past (see also Unit 14):
 It was his 64th birthday in 2006 and he was due to retire the following year.
 Nathan had resolved to become ﬂ uent in Spanish before he left university. 
 The new management had been looking to create 20 new jobs. 
Some people use shall (and shan’t) instead of will (and won’t) in statements about the future with I 
and we. However, it is more common to use will (particularly its contracted form ’ll) and won’t:
 He was a good friend and we shall miss him greatly. (more commonly … we’ll miss …)
 I’m just going to buy a newspaper. I shan’t be long. (more commonly I won’t …)
In current English we don’t usually use shall / shan’t with other subjects to talk about the future, 
although this is found in formal rules and in older literary styles:
 The match referee shall be the sole judge of fair play.
 All people of the world shall live together as brothers.
We use some verbs with a to-inﬁ nitive to talk about intentions:
 We guarantee to refund your money if you are dissatisﬁ ed 
with the computer.
The present simple + to-inﬁ nitive or present continuous + to-inﬁ nitive 
can be used with the verbs marked * to talk about intentions:
 I aim to get to Bangkok by the end of June. (or I’m aiming to get …; 
I was aiming to get … is also possible, but more tentative)
Some people, particularly in speech and in journalism, use be looking + to-inﬁ nitive to mean 
planning a course of action:
 We’ re looking to create 3,000 jobs in the city over the next year.
Some phrases are commonly used to refer to actions or events in the future with a meaning similar to 
be about to + inﬁ nitive (see Unit 12C). We can use be on the verge of … / brink of … / point of … 
(+ -ing or noun) to say that something will happen soon:
 People are on the verge of starvation as the drought continues.
 Scientists are on the brink of making major advances in the ﬁ ght against AIDS.
 Exhausted, mentally and physically, she was on the point of collapse.
Be on the brink of usually refers to something important, exciting, or very bad.
We use be due to (+ inﬁ nitive) to say that something is expected to happen at a particular time, 
be sure / bound to (+ inﬁ nitive) to say that something is likely or certain to happen, and be set to 
(+ inﬁ nitive) to say that something is ready to happen:
 The company’s chief executive is due to retire next year, but following today’s announcement 
of further losses she is sure to be asked to leave sooner.
 ‘Will there be somewhere to get a coffee at the station?’ ‘Oh, yes, there ’s bound to be.’
 Her new ﬁ  lm is set to be a great success.
Note that we use due to + noun to give the reason for something, not to talk about the future 
(e.g. Due to fog, all ﬂ ights from the airport have been cancelled).
26
13
Also: aim*, agree, 
expect*, hope*, 
intend*, mean, 
plan*, promise, 
propose*, resolve, 
undertake, want*
Unit
27
Exercises
 13
13. 1  Expand the notes to complete the news extracts, using the phrases in A . 
verge – become        sure – face        brink – go        set – launch        
set – make        sure – provide         bound – raise         due – return        
point – sign          point – move         verge – quit        due – undergo
1/2
13.2  Complete the sentences with the verb pairs from the box. Use either the present simple or 
present continuous for the ﬁ rst verb. If both tenses are possible, write them both. B & C
aim – to study        expect – to ﬁ nish         look – to replace          intend – to move
propose – to deal        resolve – to give up        guarantee – to ﬁ nd
1  My computer is now ﬁ  ve years old, and I ’m looking to replace  it with a faster one.
2 In the ﬁ rst half of the course we’ll study microbiology, and in the second half I 
 with genetic engineering.
3 We haven’t completed the work yet, but we  
it later this week.
4 I haven’t done much work at college so far, but I  
harder from now on.
5 Every New Year he  eating biscuits, but by February 
he has started again.
6 We can’t provide the spare parts ourselves, but we  
a supplier who can.
7 At the moment I commute for over three hours a day, but I  
closer to my work in the next few months.
13.3  Underline the possible options. D
1 I have passed your letter on to the manager who shall / will reply shortly.
2 Sorry, but I shan’t / won’t be able to give you a lift after all.
3 I think your parents shall / will be very happy with your decision.
4 Only people over the age of 18 shall / will be eligible to vote in the referendum.
5 You shan’t / won’t want to eat your dinner tonight after all that chocolate.
The decision of Cornico to relocate its international headquarters to Switzerland is 
bound to raise  questions about the government’s new profi ts tax. It seems that other 
major fi nancial fi  rms are also on the point of moving  their headquarters out of London.
3/4
 NASA ’s latest Mars probe is  to Earth later today. A spokesperson for NASA 
said that the probe would be bringing back rock samples that are  exciting 
new information about the planet.
5/6
 The Countryside Conservation Society is  a new million-Euro scheme 
for the protection of endangered plant species. It is estimated that over 200 species are 
 extinct in the country. 
11/12
 EU agriculture ministers are  an important announcement on increasing 
support to farmers when they meet in Brussels on Monday. ‘Many farmers are  
out of business,’ said the Italian representative, ‘and the matter must be decided very soon.’
9/10
 Tennis star Sancho Gomez is  a second operation on his injured shoulder. 
He was  tennis earlier this year after a fi  rst operation was unsuccessful.
7/8
 Sources at the United Nations have said that the governments of North and South Alicia are 
 an agreement to end their long-running border dispute. However, any 
agreement is  resistance from rebel forces in South Alicia, who have said 
they will fi ght on.
Unit
A
B
The future seen from the past
To talk about an activity or event that was in the future at a particular point in the past, we can 
use was / were to + inﬁ nitive (for things that actually happened) and was / were to have + past 
participle (for things that were expected, but didn’t happen):
 At the time she was probably the best actor in the theatre company, but in fact some of her 
colleagues were to become much better known.
 The boat, which was to have taken them to the island, failed to arrive.
 He was to ﬁ nd out years later that the car he had bought was stolen.
Note, however, that in less formal contexts it is more natural to use be supposed to:
 I was supposed to help, but I was ill. (more natural than I was to have helped …)
There are a number of ways of talking about an activity or 
event that was in the future at a particular point in the past. 
In order to express this idea, we can use the past tenses of the 
verb forms we would normally use to talk about the future. 
These forms are often used in reporting (see Units 32–36). 
Compare the following sentences:
The future from now … The future from the past …
 I haven’t got much money, so I think I ’ll 
stay at home this summer.
 Eleni decided that she would stay at home 
for the summer.
 I ’m not going to say anything about the 
exams today, because I don’t have time.
 I wasn’t going to say anything about the 
exams, but the students asked me to.
 I ’m having a meeting with my tutor 
tomorrow to discuss my work.
 I couldn’t go to the match because I was 
having a meeting with my tutor.
 Will you be going alone, or is Louise going 
with you?
 At the time, I thought I would be going 
alone, but then Jan said he wanted to come.
 The exam will have ﬁ nished by three 
o’clock, so I’ll see you then.
 The exam was so easy that most people 
would have ﬁ nished after 30 minutes.
 There is to be a meeting of ministers this 
evening.
 It was announced that there was to be a 
meeting of ministers that evening.
 When the school closes, all the children are 
to be moved to one nearby.
 Mrs Novak heard that she was to be 
moved to a post in a nearby school.
 As the bell is about to go for the end of the 
lesson, pack your books away.
 The bell was about to go when all the 
children started to pack their books away.
If the future seen from the past is still in the future for the speaker, then either form is possible:
 It was announced this morning that there is / was to be a statement this evening.
In some cases we don’t know whether the activity or event happened or not. Compare:
 I didn’t phone to give him the news because we were seeing each other later. He was very 
upset when I told him. (= we saw each other) and
 We were seeing each other later that day, but I had to phone and cancel. (= we didn’t see 
each other)
28
14
past now
Unit
29
Exercises
14. 1  Write ✓ if the italicised parts are correct. If they are wrong, correct them. A
1  I’ m going to do the washing, but we’d run out of washing powder.
2 The concert tonight would be over by about 9:30. We could eat after that.
3  When we were passing Ivan’s house, we thought we’d drop in and see him.
4  A: Where shall I hang my coat?   B: Sorry, I thought Ella will have shown you. Over there.
5 The manager of Newtown United said that the team is to be announced at nine tomorrow.
6 The second half was about to start, so shall we go back to our seats now?
7  I knew that by the morning I would be feeling exhausted, but I just wanted to go dancing.
8 A: Where’s Oliver? He is supposed to be here yesterday, and there’s still no sign of him.   
B:  I’m about to ask the same question.
9  I didn’t phone Ben this morning because I was going to see him when I’ve ﬁ nished work.
 10 DNA testing was to be used by police in the search for the missing Dublin schoolboy. His parents 
have welcomed the news.
 11 We are meeting at seven in the Globe coffee bar. Can you be there, too?
 12  We didn’t expect that having a rabbit as a pet will cause so many problems.
 In which three cases can we use either a past or present tense form in the italicised parts?
14.2  Choose the more appropriate option, (a) or (b), to complete these sentences. B
1 The meeting was to have taken place in the hall, …
 a but had to be cancelled at the last minute. 
 b and was well attended.
2  She was to have appeared with Heath Ledger in his last ﬁ lm…
 a and was a tremendous success.
 b but the part went to her sister.
3 Later, in Rome, I was to meet Professor Pearce …
 a and was very impressed by his knowledge of Italian culture.
 b but he left before I got there.
4 The twenty police ofﬁ cers who were to have gone off duty at eight …
 a went to the Christmas party.
 b had to remain in the police station.
5 It was to take 48 hours to get to Japan …
 a and we were exhausted when we arrived.
 b but we managed to do it in only a day.
6 After the war he was to teach at London University …
 a but no money was available to employ him.
 b for ten years.
7  The bridge was to have been completed this year …
 a but a number of accidents have led to delays.
 b and is to be opened by the president next month.
8 The new road was to have a major impact on trafﬁ c in the busy town centre, …
 a making life much easier for commuters.
 b but the crowded roads continued.
9 The construction of the cathedral was to have begun in 1650 …
 a and go on for over 80 years.
 b but a shortage of labour delayed the start for a further 20 years. 
 10 We were to stay with Rodrigo in Lisbon …
 a many times before he moved to Madrid.
 b but he moved to Madrid.
14
Unit
A
B
C
E
D
Can, could, be able to and be allowed to
Can and could: possibility
To talk about the theoretical possibility of something happening we use could, not can. However, we 
use can, not could, to say that something is possible and actually happens. Compare:
 It could be expensive to keep a cat. (= if we had one, it could or it may not be expensive) and
 It can be expensive to keep a cat. (= it can be, and it sometimes is)
We use can’t, not couldn’t, to say that something is theoretically or actually impossible:
 There can’t be many people in the world who haven’t watched television.
 The doctor can’t see you this morning; he’s busy at the hospital.
Could and be allowed to: permission
To say that in the past someone had general permission to do something – that is, to do it at any 
time – we can use either could or was / were allowed to. However, to talk about permission for one 
particular past action, we use was / were allowed to, but not could. Compare:
 Anyone was allowed to ﬁ sh in the lake when the council owned it. (or … could ﬁ sh …) and
 Although he didn’t have a ticket, Ned was allowed to come in. (not … could come in.)
In negative sentences, we can use either couldn’t or wasn’t / weren’t allowed to to say that 
permission was not given in general or particular situations:
 I couldn’t / wasn’t allowed to open the present until my birthday.
We use can to indicate that there is a very real possibility of a future event happening. Using could 
suggests that something is less likely or that there is some doubt about it. Compare:
 We can stay with Jake in Oslo. (= we will be able to stay) and
 We could stay with Jake in Oslo. (= it’s possible; if he’s there)
If we talk about a single achievement, rather than a general ability in the past, we usually use be able 
to rather than could. Compare:
 Sophie could play the ﬂ ute quite well. (or … was able to …; a general ability) and
 She swam strongly and was able to cross the river easily, even though it was swollen by the 
heavy rain. (not She swam strongly and could cross …; a speciﬁ c achievement)
However, could is usually more natural than be able to –
 in negative sentences:
 I tried to get up but I couldn’t move. 
 with verbs of the senses, e.g. feel, hear, see, smell, taste, and with verbs of ‘thinking’, e.g. believe, 
decide, remember, understand:
 I could remember the crash, but nothing after that. 
 after the phrases the only thing / place / time, and after all when it means ‘the only thing’:
 All we could see were his feet. 
 to suggest that something almost didn’t happen, particularly with almost, hardly, just, nearly:
 I could nearly touch the ceiling. 
Can, could and be able to: ability
We sometimes use be able to instead of can and could to talk about ability. We avoid be able to –
 when we talk about something that is happening as we speak:
 Watch me, Mum; I can stand on one leg. 
(not … I’m able to stand on one leg.)
 before passives:
 Films can now easily be streamed online. (rather than Films 
are now easily able to be streamed …) 
 when the meaning is ‘know how to’:
 Can you cook? (rather than Are you able to cook?)
30
15
Reminder ➜ C1 – C7

Unit
31
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 5 (page 242)
15. 1  Underline the correct or more natural option (or both if possible). A & B
1 Valuables can / are able to be left in the hotel safe. Please ask at the reception desk.
2 We could / were able to ﬁ nish the hockey match before it started snowing too heavily.
3 The rebels could / were able to draw on the support of over 20,000 soldiers.
4 Could you / Were you able to understand Professor Larsen’s lecture? I found it really difﬁ cult.
5 A: Do you want a game?   B: Sorry, I can’t / ’m not able to play chess.
6 Look at me, I can / ’m able to ride my bike without any help.
7 When the ﬁ reﬁ ghters arrived they could / were able to put out the ﬂ ames in a couple of minutes.
8 The air was so polluted in the city centre, I could hardly / was hardly able to breathe.
9 I knew Petra had been decorating. I could / was able to smell the paint when I came in.
 10 Can you / Are you able to drive without your glasses?
 11 No changes can / are able to be made to this rail ticket after purchase.
 12 He could / was able to untie the ropes without the guards noticing.
 13 She looked all over the house, but couldn’t / wasn’t able to ﬁ nd her keys anywhere.
 14 I was very busy at work, but I could / was able to have a couple of days off last week.
15.2  Complete these blog posts with can, could and be allowed to (or two forms if possible). 
Use negative forms where necessary. A–E
a
15
We went camping in the north of Spain last July. As you probably know, it (1)  
rain a lot on the coast, even in midsummer, and the day we arrived we (2)  
believe how heavy the rain was. Eventually we found a place to camp, in a field next to a 
beach. We had a new tent – the advertisement for it said, ‘This tent (3)  be 
assembled in two minutes with no previous experience.’ What a joke! Now, there 
(4)  be many people who haven’t had difficulty putting up a tent at some time, 
but it took us more than two hours. And then, just as it was done, a man came along and said 
that we (5)  camp there – it was private property. So we had to take the tent 
down again. Then Eva just said, ‘Well, we (6)  stay here all night. Let’s go to that 
hotel in the last village we drove through.’ Unfortunately, when we got there they were full. 
But they were very kind and we (7)  camp at the end of their garden!
b
,WLVRIWHQVDLGWKDWVSRUWVFRDFKHV   EHVWULFWEXWDWKOHWH/DQFH-RUGDQ¶V
ZDVLQFUHGLEO\KDUGRQKLPLQWKH\HDUEHIRUHWKH2O\PSLF*DPHV )RULQVWDQFH/DQFH
  VWD\XSODWHUWKDQQLQHDOWKRXJKRQKLVELUWKGD\KH   ZDWFK
WHOHYLVLRQXQWLOWHQDVLWZDVDVSHFLDORFFDVLRQ2IFRXUVHD OO/DQFH  WKLQNRIZDV
JRLQJRXWZLWKKLVIULHQGVLQWKHHYHQLQJDQGKH   KDUGO\ZDLWIRUWKH*DPHVWR
¿QLVKWRJHWEDFNWRDQRUPDOOLIH:KHQKHFRPSODLQHGKLVFRD FKMXVWVDLGµ7UXVWPHDQG\RX¶OO
ZLQJROG±\RX  ORVH¶$QGKLVFRDFKZDVULJKW+HZRQDJROGPHGDOLQWKH
PHWUHVLQDZRUOGUHFRUGWLPH$QGRQWKHQLJKWRIKLVYLFWRU\ /DQFH  FHOHEUDWH
±E\VWD\LQJXSXQWLOR¶FORFNµ%XWQRODWHU¶VDLGKLVFRDF Kµ7KH:RUOG&KDPSLRQVKLSVDUHRQO\
WZR\HDUVDZD\¶
Unit
A
B
C
D
E
Will, would and used to
We can use use will to draw conclusions or state assumptions about things that are the case now 
(see also Unit 9B):
 Martina will be at home by now. Let’s go and see her.
 You will know that Ewan and Lucy are engaged. (= I assume you already know)
Would and used to
When we talk about repeated events in the past that don’t happen now we can use either would or 
used to + inﬁ nitive. However, we can use would only if the time reference is clear. Compare:
 We used to play in the garden. (not We would play …; time reference not given) and
 Whenever we went to my uncle’s house, we would / used to play in the garden.
We can use used to but not would when we talk about past states that have changed:
 The factory used to be over there. 
 Didn’t you use to have red hair?
We don’t use either used to or would when we say exactly how many times in total something 
happened, how long something took, or that a single event happened at a given past time:
 We visited Switzerland four times during the 1990s. (not We would / used to visit …)
 She went to Jamaica last month. (not She would / used to go to Jamaica last month.)
Would / will have + past participle
To talk about an unreal past situation – that is, an imaginary situation or a situation that might have 
happened in the past, but didn’t – we use would have + past participle:
 I would have been happy to see him, but I didn’t have time.
However, to say that we think a past situation actually happened, we use will have + past participle:
 As it was cloudy, few people will have seen last night’s lunar eclipse. (rather than … would 
have seen …)
In speech, we can stress will or would to criticise people’s characteristic behaviour or habits:
 She just won’t do the washing up when I ask her.
 I was happy when Ryan left. He would talk about people behind their backs.
We can also express disapproval of something they have done using will:
 ‘I feel sick.’ ‘Well, if you will eat so much, I’m not surprised.’ 
Will and would
We can use will (for the present) and would (for the past) to talk about –   
 characteristic behaviour or habits:
 Every day Dan will come home from work and turn on the TV.
 At school she would always sit quietly and pay attention.
 things that are or were always true:
 Cold weather will kill certain plants.
 During the war, people would eat all kinds of things that we don’t eat now. 
(For the use of will to talk about the future, see Unit 9.)
We don’t use will or would in this way to talk about a particular occasion. Compare:
 Each time I gave him a problem he would solve it for me. and
 Last night I gave him a problem and he solved it for me. (not … he would solve it ...)
However, we can use will not (won’t) and would not (wouldn’t) in either case. Compare:
 He would / wouldn’t walk the ﬁ ve miles to his place of work. (characteristic behaviour) and
 She wouldn’t say what was wrong when I asked her.
32
16
Reminder ➜ C8 – C14
Unit
33
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 5 (page 242)
16. 1  Complete the doctor and patient speech bubbles using will or would followed by one of these 
verbs. If will or would are not possible, use a verb in the past simple. A & C
be        cause        exercise        ﬁ nd        have        know        sit        spend
16
16.2  If necessary, correct these sentences using would or used to. If neither would nor used to is 
correct, use a past simple verb form. D
1 I would enjoy studying Latin when I was at school.
2 Orwell would spend winters in Spain and summers in England.
3 We would live in a bungalow on the south coast, and then we moved to a ﬂ at in town.
4 You used to teach at Halston University, didn’t you?
5 On Saturdays and Sundays the ferry used to take tourists across to the island.
6 The committee would meet four times last week, but still no decision has been reached.
16.3  Complete these sentences with will have or would have and the past participle of one of these 
verbs. E
approve        buy        hear        hurt        notice        prefer        watch
1 According to ofﬁ  cial ﬁ gures, over half the population  
the ﬁ nal of the song contest on TV last night. 
2 I enjoyed the exhibition – but I don’t think my grandmother  
of it.
3 I don’t think the dog  anyone, but I was still glad when the 
owner took it away.
4 I’m sure by now you  about yesterday’s robbery at the supermarket.
5 The train journey was quite comfortable, although I  to ﬂ y. 
6 Regular readers  the return of a popular feature to our website.
7 A: Did you like the present Justin gave you for your birthday?   B: Well, an umbrella stand isn’t 
something I  myself, but I suppose it might be useful.
16.4  Complete B’s responses below to show criticism or disapproval. B
1 A: I think I’m putting on weight.   B: Well, if you  .
2 A: I’ve got a headache.   B: Well, if you  .
3 A: I’m really hot.   B: Well, if you  .
Most days I  
eight hours or more in front of 
my computer.
1
 5 Over time poor posture 
 back pain.
5
Yesterday I  a 
sharp pain in my lower back.
2
 Before computers came along, 
people  rarely 
 still for so long.
6
No, I’m not that ﬁ t now. When I 
was at college, I  
in the gym most days.
3
I’m sure you  
about the need to take regular 
breaks. 
7
When I tried to stand I 
 that I couldn’t 
straighten up.
4
That  probably 
 the result of 
sitting badly. 
8
E
Unit
A
May and might
May and might often have a similar meaning when we talk about possibility. 
However, we prefer may in academic or formal language to talk about 
characteristics or behaviour:
 The seeds from the plant may grow up to 20 centimetres in length.
and in speech we prefer might to say what we will possibly do in the future:
 I might paint the kitchen purple.
34
17
Reminder ➜ C15 – C19
B
C
D
We don’t use may to ask questions about the possibility of something happening. Instead we use, 
for example, could(n’t) or the phrase be likely:
 Could it be that you don’t want to leave? (not May it be that you …?)
 Are you likely to be in Spain again this summer? (not May you be in Spain …?)
It is possible to use might in this type of question, but it is rather formal:
 Might they be persuaded to change their minds?
Note that we can use may in formally asking for permission and offering help:
 May I leave now?   May I help you?
Might (not ‘may’) + bare inﬁ nitive is sometimes used to talk about what was typically the case in the 
past. This is a formal or literary use:
 During the war, the police might arrest you for criticising the government.
 Years ago children might be sent down mines at the age of six. (passive form)
We can also use could + bare inﬁ nitive in examples like this to talk about past ability (see Unit 15). 
For example, ‘During the war, the police could arrest you …’ means that the police were legally able to 
arrest you.
When we say that a person or thing compensates to some extent for a limitation or weakness by 
having another characteristic, we can use a pattern with may / might not + bare inﬁ nitive … but … 
or may / might not have + past participle … but …:
 The painting may not be a masterpiece, but the colours are remarkable.
 She might not have danced very gracefully, but she had a lot of energy and enthusiasm.
We use may / might (not ‘can’) + have + past participle and may / might (not ‘can’) + be + -ing to 
talk about possible events in the past, present and future:
 Do you think Laura may / might have completed the report by now? (past)
 His maths may / might have improved by the time the exam comes round. (future)
 Marco isn’t in his ofﬁ  ce. He may / might be working at home today. (present)
 When I go to Vienna I may / might be staying with Max, but I’m not sure yet. (future)
Note that could can be used in these sentences instead of may or might:
 Do you think Laura could have completed the report by now?
We can use may / might have been + -ing to talk about possible situations or activities that went on 
over a period of past time:
 Callum didn’t know where the ball was, but he thought his sister might have been playing 
with it before she left for school.
Unit
35
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 5 (page 242)
17 . 1  Complete the sentences with either may or might, whichever is more likely. 
If neither is possible, use an alternative.  A & B
1  We  go to Majorca for our holiday this summer.
2 The planet Venus  be seen clearly in the night sky this month.
3  you see Yasemin this weekend?
4 I feel really sore after playing tennis. I think I  have a bath.
5 A: Someone’s left their coat.   B:  it be Nadia’s?
6  Exceeding the stated dose  cause drowsiness.
17 .2  Underline the correct answer. C & E
1 You should have come dancing. You might have enjoyed / might enjoy it. 
2 She might have tried / might have been trying to get a book off the top shelf when she fell. 
3 Dr Carter might have come / might be coming over this evening, so can you tidy the house up a 
bit? 
4 As recently as the 1950s, employers might be requiring / might require a woman to leave her job 
when she got married. 
5 I’ve been offered a new job, so I may be moving / may have moved to Dubai. 
6 Why not come and see us in March? The weather may have been improving / may have improved 
by then. 
7 During the riots of the 1960s, people might be imprisoned / may be imprisoned simply for being 
on the streets. 
8 He said he was in a lot of pain, but he may have been exaggerating / may exaggerate.
9 In the past, left-handed children might be punishing / might be punished for not holding a pen in 
their right hand.
 10 I may have told / may tell you this before. I can’t remember.
17 .3  Complete these sentences in any appropriate way. D
1 He may not be the best singer in the world, but 
  .
2 Hugh’s old car might not be terribly comfortable, but 
  .
3 Her English grammar may not be very accurate, but 
  .
 Now expand these notes to complete the sentences below.
sound / exciting        agree / him        express / feelings openly         work / quickly 
4 He may / might not work very quickly  but at least he’s very reliable.
5 , but his opinions on music make you think.
6 , but she is really very fond of you.
7 , but the new museum of ﬁ shing is actually 
very good.
17

Unit
A
B
C
D
Must and have (got) to
In questions that hope for or expect a negative answer we prefer have (got) to, although in formal 
contexts must is sometimes used:
 Do we have to answer all the questions? (or Have we got to …?; formally Must we …?)
We use have to in questions that imply a criticism. Must can also be used, although some people 
think this is rather old-fashioned. We usually stress have and must in sentences like this:
 Do you have to play your trumpet here? It’s deafening! (formally Must you play …?)
Sometimes we can use either have to or have got to. However –
 we use have to with frequency adverbs:
 I often have to work at the weekend to get 
everything done.
 with the past simple we use had to especially in questions and negative sentences:
 When did you have to give it back? (not When had you got to give it back?)
 We didn’t have to wait too long for an answer. (not We hadn’t got to wait too long …)
 if have is contracted (e.g. I’ve, He’s, It’d) then we must include got:
 I need a new pair of shoes, and they ’ve got to be blue. (not … they’ve to be …)
 we don’t use have got to with other modal verbs:
 Motorists will have to wait until next year to use the bridge. (not Motorists will have got to 
wait …)
Note also that have got to is often preferred in informal speech.
To draw a conclusion about –
 something that happened in the past we use must + have + past participle:
 That’s not Clara’s car. She must have borrowed it from her parents.
 something happening at or around the time of speaking we use must be + -ing:
 I can’t hear a noise. You must be imagining things.
 something that is likely to happen in the future we use must be going to or must be + -ing:
 ‘What are all those workmen doing?’ ‘I think they must be going to dig up the road.’
 I was wrong about the meeting being today. It must be happening next Friday.
 a present situation we use must be, or have (got) to be in informal speech:
 Their goalkeeper has got to be at least two metres tall! (or … must be …)
We can use must have to to say that we conclude something based on what we know about a present 
situation and must have had to to conclude something about a past situation:
 I can’t access the database. You must have to put in a password. (= a password is necessary)
 Matt wasn’t at home when I went round. He must have had to go out unexpectedly.
Note that we can’t say ‘must’ve (got) to’ but we can say must’ve had to.
We use must and must not in formal rules and regulations and in warnings:
 Bookings must be made at least seven days before departure.
 The government must not be allowed to appoint judges.
In spoken English we often use must and mustn’t (= must not) to propose a future arrangement, 
such as a meeting or social event, without making detailed plans:
 We must get together more often.   We mustn’t leave it so long next time.
We can also use I must … to remind ourselves to do something:
 I must charge my phone. I meant to do it yesterday, but I forgot.
36
18
Reminder ➜ C20– C24
Also: always, never, normally, 
rarely, sometimes, etc.
Unit
37
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 5 (page 242)
18. 1  Complete the sentences with one of these forms: must have + past participle; must + bare 
inﬁ nitive; must be + -ing; or must have (had) to. Use the verbs given. B
1 When I left my laptop on the train I thought I’d never see it again. But someone 
 it and handed it in to the lost property ofﬁ ce. (ﬁ nd)
2 Luisa owns a big car and a yacht. She  incredibly rich. (be)
3 A: Everyone’s going into the hall.   B: The meeting  soon. Let’s go. 
(start)
4 Without things like washing machines and dishwashers our grandparents 
 much harder in the kitchen than we do today. (work)
5 I didn’t think Rob was coming to the meeting. He  his mind. (change)
6 A: I wonder how you get past security.   
B: I suppose you  some form of ID. (show)
7 A: I thought Paul would be home.   
B: He  Lotta to work. He said he would. (take)
8 Look at all those birds. There  at least a thousand of them. (be)
18.2  Write new sentences with a similar meaning. Use have / has got to where possible or 
preferable; if not, use have / has to. D
1 It is necessary to do all of this photocopying before lunchtime. 
All of this photocopying has got to be done / has to be done before lunchtime  
2  It is rarely necessary to ask Hannah to tidy her room.  Hannah … 
3 Is it necessary for us to hand in the homework tomorrow?  Have …
4 It wasn’t necessary for me to go to the hospital after all.  I …
5 Was it necessary for Ben to go alone?  Did …
6  It is sometimes necessary for Adam to start work at 6:30.  Adam …
7 It is necessary to extend the college to accommodate the new students.  The college …
8 It may be necessary to cancel our holiday because my mother is ill. We …
18.3  If necessary, correct the italicised parts of this email message. A–D
18
 Can you ﬁ  nd three other common expressions with must?
Hello Maria,
Sorry I haven’t been in touch for a while. You (1) must have been wondering what’s been happening. Well, I must 
admit I’ve had a pretty awful week. When I got home from work last Monday, the front door was wide open. The 
door’s very stiff, and I (2) always have got to pull it very hard to shut it. My neighbour’s always saying, ‘(3) Have 
you to bang  the door so hard?’ When I went in I found that the house had been burgled. They (4) must have 
climbed over the fence in the back garden. None of the windows and doors were damaged, so someone very small 
(5) must have to squeeze  through the tiny window in the kitchen. I suppose I (6) must leave it open, but I didn’t 
expect anyone to be able to get in. Then they (7) must have come through the house and opened the front door 
IRUWKHRWKHUV2IFRXUVHWKH¿ UVWWKLQJ,GLGZDVWRFDOOWKHSROLFHDQG,mustn’t wait very long for them to get 
here. Fortunately, the only thing that was taken was my TV. I think the burglars (9) must be disturbed , perhaps 
when the postman came. So now (10) I’ve to get a new lock for the front door and replace the TV, and I (11) must 
put some locks on the windows. I suppose I (12) may must get a burglar alarm, too. I must say I’ve never really 
wanted one, but needs must!
Anyway, (13) I’ve to go. Hope the family is well. Jessica (14) must get ready to go back to university. And you 
(15) must be busy with the new school year just about to start. When you have time, we (16) have to get together 
for a weekend.
All the best for now,
Amy
Unit
A
B
C
D
Need(n’t), don’t need to and don’t have to
We can often use either needn’t or don’t have to with little difference in meaning to say that it is 
unnecessary to do something:
 You needn’t whisper. Nobody can hear us. (or You don’t have to …)
However, some people prefer needn’t when it is the speaker who decides the lack of necessity, and 
don’t have to when somebody else or external rules make something unnecessary. Compare:
 As you worked late yesterday you needn’t come in until ten tomorrow morning. (the 
speaker’s decision) and
 We’ve been told that we don’t have to be at work until ten tomorrow. (reporting someone 
else’s decision.)
We can use needn’t (or don’t have to) to say that something is not necessarily true. We don’t use 
mustn’t in this way (see also Unit 18C):
 Volcanoes needn’t erupt constantly to be classiﬁ ed as ‘active’. (or Volcanoes don’t have to 
erupt …; not Volcanoes mustn’t erupt …)
 Nowadays it needn’t cost a fortune to own an e-book reader. (or Nowadays it doesn’t have 
to cost …; not Nowadays it mustn’t cost …)
To give permission not to do something we can use either needn’t or don’t need to:
 You needn’t cut the grass, I’ll do it later. (or You don’t need to cut the grass …)
To talk about a general necessity, we prefer don’t need to:
 You don’t need to be over 18 to get into a nightclub. (rather than You needn’t be …)
We can use need as an ordinary or a modal verb (followed by a 
bare inﬁ nitive). As a modal verb it doesn’t change its tense and doesn’t 
add ‘-s’ for the third person singular. Compare:
 I needed to leave early.     or         She’s thirsty. She needs a drink. (= ordinary verb) and
 You needn’t speak so loudly.  (= modal verb)
When it is a modal verb need is most commonly used in negative sentences: 
 I’ve already cleaned the car so you needn’t bother to do it.
 I was very nervous before the interview, but I needn’t have worried – I got the job!
Other verbs often used with need not (needn’t): apply, concern, fear, involve, mean, panic
It is sometimes used in questions, but we prefer to use need as an ordinary verb or have to:
 Need you go so soon? (= modal verb; less common and rather formal)
 Do you need to go so soon? (= ordinary verb)     or          Do you have to go so soon?
It is rarely used in afﬁ rmative sentences (that is, not questions or negatives), but is sometimes found 
in written English, particularly in ﬁ ction:
 We need have no fear for Nicole, she can take care of herself.
In other styles of formal written English it is used in this way with negative words such as hardly, 
never, nobody / no one, and only:
 The changes need only be small to make the proposals acceptable. (less formally The changes 
only need to be …)
 Nobody ever need know about the money. (less formally Nobody ever needs to know …)
 ‘I don’t want my parents to know.’ ‘They need never ﬁ nd out.’ (less formally They never need 
to ﬁ nd out.)
38
19
Reminder ➜ C25– C28
Unit
39
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 5 (page 242)
19. 1  Match the sentence beginnings and ends. Join them with needn’t and the bare inﬁ nitive of one 
of the verbs from the box. A
bother        change        concern        panic        worry
1 I’ll give you a lift to the station so you …  … the details on the form.
2 The questions are in the book so you … … yourself with viruses.
3 All the windows have screens so you …  … to copy them down.
4 Our software provides full computer security so you … … about booking a taxi.
5  The new tax laws don’t come into force until next year so you …  … about being bitten by 
  mosquitoes.
19.2  Rewrite the following in a formal style using need. A
1  It is hardly necessary for us to remind you that the money is now due.
 We need hardly remind you that the money is now due.  
2 It is only necessary for us to look at the rainfall ﬁ gures to see the seriousness of the problem.
3 With such a lead in the opinion polls it is hardly necessary for the Democrats to bother 
campaigning before the election.
4  It is not necessary for anyone to know who paid the ransom to the kidnappers.
5 After such a huge lottery win, it is not necessary for him to work again.
19.3  Underline the more likely option. If the options are equally likely, underline them both. B
1 In most developed countries, people needn’t / don’t need to boil water before they drink it.
2  You needn’t / don’t need to walk. I’ll give you a lift.
3  I’ll email a summary of the lecture so you needn’t / don’t need to take notes.
4 You needn’t / don’t need to have a university degree to become a police ofﬁ cer.
5 You needn’t / don’t need to buy me a birthday present.
6 In most cities you needn’t / don’t need to pay to get into the galleries and museums.
19.4  Correct any mistakes in the extracts from a speech made by the managing director of a 
company to her employees. A–D
19
Changes in technology mustn’t 
be a problem, but in fact 
provide opportunities.
3
I don’t have to remind you 
that we are competing with 
two other companies.
4
You don’t have to cancel your 
holiday plans.
6
We mustn’t allow our rate of 
production to drop.
7
You needn’t to worry about 
losing your jobs.
1
Need we make any changes in 
company policy?
2
I need hardly to tell you how 
important it is that we get this 
order.
5
The present ﬁ nancial 
difﬁ culties mustn’t mean that 
people will lose their jobs.
8
Unit
A
B
C
D
Should, ought to and had better
We can use should in questions that are offers or that request conﬁ rmation or advice:
 Should I phone for a taxi for you? 
 Who should I pass the message to?
Note that in sentences like these we can also use shall with a very similar meaning.
Compare the use of shall and should in sentences such as the following, where ‘I shall’ means ‘I 
intend to’ and ‘I should’ means ‘I ought to’:
 I shall read the script on the train tomorrow. (or I’ll read …) and
 I should read the script on the train tomorrow but I know that I’ll be too tired.
We can use had better instead of should / ought to, especially in spoken English, to say that we think 
it is a good idea to do something:
 If you’re not well, you ’d better ask Clare to go instead. (or … you should / ought to …)
although we don’t use it to talk about the past or to make general comments:
 You should / ought to have caught a later train. (not You had better have caught …)
 I don’t think parents should / ought to give children sweets. (not … parents had better 
give …)
We prefer had better if we want to express particular urgency or in demands and threats:
 There’s someone moving about downstairs. We ’d better call the police, quickly.
Note that the negative form is had better not, and in questions the subject comes after had:
 He ’d better not be late again or he’ll be in trouble.
 Had we better get a taxi? (or Should we get …?)
We use should / ought to + have + past participle to talk about something that didn’t happen in the 
past and we are sorry that it didn’t:
 We should / ought to have waited for the rain to stop. (I’m sorry we didn’t)
We often use this pattern to indicate some regret or criticism and the negative forms shouldn’t / 
oughtn’t to have are almost always used in this way.
We also use should / ought to + have + past participle to talk about an expectation that something 
happened, has happened, or will happen:
 If the ﬂ  ight was on time, he should / ought to have arrived in Jakarta early this morning.
We can often use either should or ought to to talk about obligations and 
recommendations (e.g. You should / ought to ﬁ nish your homework before 
you go out) and probability (e.g. It should / ought to be ready by now) although in general should is 
used more frequently. Ought to is used particularly in speech and most often to talk about obligation 
rather than probability.
When we conclude, on the basis of some evidence we have, that something is certain or very likely we 
can use must (see Unit 18) but not should / ought to:
 It’s the third time she’s been skating this week. She must really enjoy it.
Note also the following details –
 we prefer should when we say what an outside authority recommends:
 The manual says that the computer should be disconnected from the power supply before 
the cover is removed. (rather than … ought to be disconnected …)
 we use should (or would), not ought to, when we give advice with I …:
 I should leave early tomorrow, if I were you. (or I would leave …; or I’d leave …)
 we prefer should in questions, particularly wh-questions:
 What should I do if I have any problems?   Should I ring you at home?
40
20
Reminder ➜ C29– C32
Unit
41
Exercises
20. 1  Complete these sentences with should / ought to + inﬁ nitive (active), should / ought to be + 
past participle (passive), or should / ought to have + past participle using each of the verbs 
from the box once only. A & B
answer        arrive        be        go        put        remove        resign        send        wear        win
1 Thomas is running so well at the moment that he  
the 800 metres easily.
2 Where  the cheese? In the fridge?
3 The tickets  a couple of weeks before we go on holiday.
4 Payment for the full amount  with this application form.
5  All packaging  before switching on the printer for the ﬁ rst 
time.
6  It’s important to look smart at the interview. You  a suit.
7 There are many people who think the President  years ago.
8   we  the questions in 
English or in French?
9 If you want my advice, I  by train rather than car.
 10  I can’t imagine what’s happened to Nadia. She  here by now.
20.2  In which sentences can you use should or must and in which can you only use must? Where 
both are possible, consider the difference between should and must. A
1 A timetable  be set for withdrawing the army.
2 Lev isn’t home yet. He  have been held up at work.
3  A: I wonder how old Louis is?   
B: Well, he went to school with my mother, so he  be well over 50.
4 If you smell gas, you  phone the emergency number.
5  You  try to visit Nepal – it’s a beautiful country.
6 A: I know I’m always complaining that my house is small, but it’s very convenient for work.  
B: Yes, it   be handy living so close to your ofﬁ ce.
20.3  If necessary correct these conversations using should / ought to, must, shall, or had better, or 
write ✓. A, C & D
1  A: There’s something wrong with David’s computer yet again.
B: He should wish he’d never bought it.
2 A: The next meeting’s on 3rd April.
B: I’d better make a note of that, or I’ll forget.
3  A: Have you put on weight recently?
B: Yes. I shall do more exercise, but I never seem to have time.
4 A: The children from next door have been throwing stones at our windows.
B: Well, they shouldn’t do it again, otherwise I’ll call the police.
5 A: I’m freezing.
B: You’d better have worn a thicker coat.
6 A:  Businesses had better not be allowed to give money 
to political parties.
 B: I totally agree.
7 A: When have we got to be in Bristol?
B: By four. I think we’d better get started.
8 A: Do you want to go out for lunch?
B: Well, I should be revising for my maths exam … but okay.
9 A: I’ve looked all over the house and can’t ﬁ nd the keys. 
B: Well, if they’re not here, they must still be in the car.
 10 A: It’s so expensive to park here. 
B: Yes, I don’t think people had better pay to park at work at all.
➜ Additional exercise 5 (page 242)
20
Unit
A
B
C
D
Linking verbs: be, appear, seem; become, get, etc.
We use the linking verb become to describe a process of change. A number of other linking verbs can 
be used instead of become, including come, get, go, grow, turn (into).
We use get rather than become: in informal speech and writing before difﬁ cult, ill, interested, 
pregnant, suspicious, unhappy, and worried; in imperatives; and in phrases such as get changed 
(clothes), get dressed, get married / divorced:
 I ﬁ  rst got suspicious when he looked into all the cars. (more formally … became suspicious …)
 Don’t get upset about it!  Where did you live before you got married?
We prefer become to talk about a more abstract or technical process 
of change:
 He became recognised as an expert.
 Their bodies have become adapted to high altitudes.
We use become, not get, if there is a noun phrase after the linking verb:
 Dr Morales became an adviser to the government.
We use go or turn, not usually get or become, when we talk about colours changing:
 The trafﬁ  c lights turned / went green and I pulled away.
We often use go to talk about changes, particularly for unwanted situations. For example: 
go deaf / blind / bald; go mad / crazy / wild; 
go bad / off / mouldy / rotten; go bust; go dead; 
go missing; go wrong.
But note: get ill, get old, get tired. 
 The company went bust and had 
to close.
 My computer’s gone wrong again.
 Some people get ill very easily. 
After the verbs come, get, and grow (but not after become) we can use a to-inﬁ nitive. Come and 
grow are often used to talk about gradual change:
 I eventually came / grew to appreciate his work. (not … became to appreciate his work.)
After the verbs appear (= seems true), look (= seem), prove, seem, and turn out we can often either 
include or omit to be:
 The room appears (to be) brighter than when I last saw it.
However, following these verbs to be is usually included before the adjectives alive, alone, asleep, 
and awake, and before the -ing forms of verbs:
 I didn’t go in because she appeared to be asleep. (not … she appeared asleep.)
Before a noun we include to be when the noun tells us what the subject is, but often leave it out when 
we give our opinion of the person or thing in the subject. We leave out to be in formal English. Compare:
 He walked into what seemed to be a cave. (not … what seemed a cave.) and
 She seems (to be) a very efﬁ cient salesperson .
When an adjective or noun phrase is used after a verb to describe the subject or say what or who the 
subject is, the adjective or noun phrase is a complement and the verb is a linking verb:
 Clara is a doctor.  She seemed unable to concentrate.
Other linking verbs:
‘being’ linking verbs: e.g. be, keep, 
prove, remain, stay
Most of these verbs can be followed by either an adjective or 
noun phrase (e.g. It sounds nice / a nice place). 
‘becoming’ linking verbs: 
e.g. become, come, end up, 
grow, turn out
When they are used as linking verbs, come and grow 
(e.g. come to know, grow thoughtful) can’t be followed by 
a noun phrase. 
‘seeming’ linking verbs: 
e.g. appear, look, seem, sound
Keep is only followed by a noun if an adjective follows it 
(e.g. It kept him awake).
42
21
Also with: apparent, 
aware, convinced, 
infected, irrelevant, 
obvious
Unit
43
Exercises
 21
21. 1  Put brackets around to be in these sentences if it can be left out. B
1 The job turned out to be far easier than I’d expected.
2 When I looked through the window, Ella appeared to be alone.
3 What he called his ‘little cottage in the country’ proved to be a castle.
4 Hassan proved to be an excellent source of information about the town.
5 She appeared to be satisﬁ ed with the work I’d done.
6 I’ve adjusted the aerial and the television seems to be working okay now.
7 When I picked the crab up I thought it was dead, but it turned out to be alive and pinched me.
8 With only ﬁ ve minutes of the match left, Spain look to be heading to victory.
9 A: We’ve decided to buy a Ford.   B: That seems to be a very good choice.
 10 He only looked to be about ten years old, but I knew he must be a lot older.
21.2  Complete the sentences with an appropriate form of become or get. C
1 Give me a few minutes to  changed, and then I’ll be ready to go.
2 The state of the railways  a major political issue during the last election campaign.
3 Research has shown that women who  pregnant while dieting increase their child’s 
risk of obesity. 
4 The reasons for my decision will  clear at the next meeting.
5 Don’t  annoyed with me, but I’ve lost the car keys.
6 I didn’t ﬁ nish the book. I just couldn’t  interested in it.
7 After the strange events in the house she  convinced that it was haunted.
8 I had just  divorced when I met Marianne.
21.3  Complete each sentence with an appropriate form of one of the verbs in brackets and a word or 
phrase from the box. D
 berserk         blind        bust        dead        to know        to like        red        tired
1 I was at a zoo once when an elephant went berserk and attacked its keeper. (go / turn)
2 A few seconds later the line  and Marc put down the handset. (go / turn)
3 After the spider bit Rachel her ankle  and started to swell up. (go / get)
4 He’s actually quite friendly when you  him. (become / get)
5 I’ll take over driving when you  . (get / go)
6 We soon  each other and have been great friends ever since. (become / come)
7 The doctor told me that without immediate treatment I might  . (go / turn)
8 The company  when the bank wouldn’t lend it any more money. (go / get)
21.4  If necessary, correct the italicised parts of this blog. A–D
The morning we were going on holiday everything seemed to (1) turn wrong. The taxi was due at 8:00 
to take us to the airport. When I looked in on Adam at 7:00 he (2) seemed awake, so I went downstairs 
to make breakfast. When I opened the fridge I found that the milk (3) had gone off, so we couldn’t have 
breakfast. Then Adam (4) seemed taking a long time to come down, so at 7:30 I went back upstairs and 
he still (5) hadn’t become dressed. He said he wasn’t feeling well, but I just shouted, ‘You can’t (6) get 
ill when we’re going on holiday!’ After that the keys to the luggage (7) got missing, but Adam eventually 
found them in his jacket pocket. By 8:30 the taxi hadn’t arrived and I was starting (8) to become worried. 
It was (9) getting obvious that we were going to miss our plane if we didn’t leave soon. But just then the 
taxi arrived and we made it to the airport with minutes to spare. Surprisingly, after such a bad start, it 
(10) turned out to be an excellent holiday.
Unit
A
B
C
D
Forming passive sentences 1
Some verbs that are followed by object + bare inﬁ nitive (= an inﬁ nitive without ‘to’) in the active are 
followed by a to-inﬁ nitive in the passive: 
active V + object + bare inﬁ nitive passive
They have made him return the 
money.
He has been made to 
return the money.  
Transitive two- and three-word verbs (see also Unit 94)
Some have passive forms:
active passive
Ella looked after him. He was looked after (by Ella).
Some are not used in the passive:
active no passive
We came up against 
a problem.
 A problem was come up 
 against.  ✗
Some can be only used in the passive with certain senses:
active passive
They put out the ﬁ re. 
I put out a hand to steady 
myself.
 The ﬁ re was put out. 
  A hand was put out to 
steady myself.  ✗
Verbs followed by object + complement in the active have one passive form:
active V + object + complement passive
They elected her president. She was elected 
president.  
Verbs such as give take both a direct object (DO) and an 
indirect object (IO) in two patterns: V + IO + DO or V + DO + 
preposition + IO. These verbs have two corresponding passives: 
active  V + IO + DO  
V + DO + prep + IO
passive
Alice gave us that vase. ✓ We were given that vase (by Alice). ✓
Alice gave that vase to us. ✓ That vase was given (to) us (by Alice). ✓
The passive form you choose depends on which is more appropriate in a particular context. If we 
specify an agent (see Appendix 2), this follows by at the end of the clause. Note that in informal 
contexts ‘to’ can be left out in the second passive pattern. 
Verbs that can’t be followed by IO + DO in the active have only one of these passive forms:
active V + DO + prep + IO passive
 He explained me the problem.  ✗ 
 He explained the problem to me. ✓
 I was explained the problem.  ✗
  The problem was explained to 
me. ✓
44
22
Reminder ➜ Section D & Appendix 2
Also: award, hand, lend, 
offer, send, throw (= 
‘giving’ verbs); ask, read, 
teach (= ‘telling’ verbs)
Also: announce, demonstrate, 
describe, introduce, mention, 
propose, report, suggest 
(= ‘reporting’ verbs)
Also: appoint, declare, make, nominate, 
vote (to do with giving a particular position); 
call, name, title (= ‘naming’ verbs)
Also: feel, hear, help (also + 
object + to-inﬁ nitive), observe, 
see (see also Unit 23A)
Also: carry out (= put into practice), 
disapprove of, hold over (= delay), talk 
down to (= patronise)
Also: brush up on (= revise), cast (your mind) 
back (= try to remember), get (something) down 
(= write), take after (= resemble)
Also: (passive possible meaning / no passive 
meaning): call (someone) up (order to join 
the army / telephone); call (someone) 
back (ask to return / telephone); let in 
(allow into a place / allow rain, etc. in); 
let out (allow to leave / let out a sound)
Unit
45
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 6 (page 243)
22
22. 1  Rewrite the sentences using one or, if possible, two passive forms. Look carefully at the tense. A
1 Someone handed me a note. I was handed a note. / A note was handed to me  .
2 Someone offered her a second-hand bicycle.
3 Someone has proposed improvements to the developers.
4 Someone suggested some interesting changes to me.
5 Someone awarded him a prize.
6 Someone will announce the President’s arrival to the waiting journalists.
7 Someone had mentioned the password to the thieves.
8 Someone has lent me some skis.
9 Someone is sending me a lot of spam emails.
 10 Someone is going to explain the changes to the students.
22.2  Complete each ﬁ rst sentence with a suitable form of a verb from the box. Then complete the 
second sentence using the same verb and the passive. A, B & C
appoint        declare        demonstrate         help         introduce        see
1 People helped  Rob to his feet after the accident. 
Rob was helped to his feet after the accident  . 
2 Tony  me to Mrs Rossi at his birthday party. I
  .
3 Has anyone  Chris this morning? Has Chris
  ?
4 They  Sven Larsen Regional Sales Director for Scandinavia. 
Sven Larsen  .
5 I am certain that Sarah  her suitability as company director to those who 
still have any doubt. I am certain that Sarah’s suitability as company director  
  .
6 They  Alan Watson winner of the election after a recount. 
Alan Watson  .
22.3  If possible, rewrite each sentence using a passive form of the italicised two- or three-word verb. 
If not, write ‘No passive’. D
1 Children often look up to strict teachers.
 Strict teachers are often looked up to by children.
2 The company phased out the product over a period of three years.
3 The students got the information down as fast as they could.
4 The decision has deprived many people of the right to vote.
5 People often brush up on a foreign language just before a holiday.
6 Ben called Mrs Patel back as soon as he got home.
7 The chairperson held over the last two items until the next committee meeting.
8 The farmer prevented walkers from crossing the ﬁ eld after he fenced it off.
Unit
A
B
C
D
E
Forming passive sentences 2: verb + -ing or 
to-inﬁ nitive
Verbs which in the active are followed by an object consisting of a noun phrase and -ing clause 
usually have no passive:
 I dread him (or his) ﬁ nding out. 
(but not He is dreaded ﬁ nding out)
Active patterns with verb + to-inﬁ nitive
The active pattern verb + object + to-inﬁ nitive is made passive with ‘be’ + past participle + to-
inﬁ nitive. Compare:
 Mr Wang has taught Peter to sing for years. and
 Peter has been taught to sing (by Mr Wang) 
for years.
The active pattern verb + to-inﬁ nitive + object is made passive with verb + to be + past participle. 
Compare:
 Supermarkets started to sell fresh pasta only in the 1990s. and
 Fresh pasta started to be sold by supermarkets only in the 1990s.
Also: (i) appear, begin, come, continue, seem, tend; 
(ii) agree, aim, arrange, attempt, hope, refuse, want
The verbs in group (i) (and start) have corresponding meanings in active and passive sentences, but 
the verbs in group (ii) do not. Compare:
 People have come to see organic food as something only the wealthy eat. (active) corresponds to
 Organic food has come to be seen as something only the wealthy eat. (passive)
 Petra wanted to help me. (active) does not correspond to
 I wanted to be helped by Petra. (passive)
Some verbs that can be followed by an -ing form can be used with a passive form being + past 
participle:
 I really love being given presents.
 The children enjoyed being taken to 
the zoo.
Active patterns with verb + -ing
Verbs followed by object + -ing in the active are made passive with ‘be’ + past participle + -ing:
 They saw the monkey climbing over the fence. (= active)
 The monkey was seen climbing over the fence. (= passive)
46
23
Also: bring, catch, hear, ﬁ nd, 
keep, notice, observe, send, 
show
Also: avoid, deny, describe, dislike, face, hate, 
(not) imagine, like, remember, report, resent
Also: advise, allow, ask, believe, 
consider, expect, feel, instruct, mean, 
order, require, tell, understand
Also: anticipate, appreciate, dislike, forget, hate, 
imagine, like, (not) mind, recall, remember
Note that in some contexts it is possible to make both verbs passive:
 Changes to the taxation system are expected to be proposed. (compare the active We 
expect the government to propose changes to the taxation system.)
Some verbs followed by an object + to-inﬁ nitive in the active have no passive:
 Susan liked Karl to be there. (but not Karl was liked to be there.)
Also: (can’t) bear, hate, love, need, prefer, want, wish (= ‘liking’ and ‘wanting’ verbs)
Unit
47
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 6 (page 243)
23
23. 1  Complete each sentence using one pair of verbs from the box. Use either was / were + past 
participle + -ing or past simple + being + past participle. A & B
avoid – take        deny – involve        face – expel        ﬁ nd – wander         keep – wait          
leave – hold        observe – hide        remember – bite        resent – give        send – tumble
1 Inger was kept waiting  for over three hours when she went for her dental appointment.
2 When the police ﬁ rst questioned him, Wayne  in the robbery.
3 I  the baby while Karen went to answer the door.
4 When I woke up in hospital, I  by the snake but nothing after that.
5 They  prisoner by pretending to be dead.
6 The man  a suspicious package under a seat in the train.
7 When the bike hit her, Ana  to the ground.
8 Two teenagers yesterday  from school after they were found 
with over a hundred stolen mobile phones.
9 The man was taken to hospital when he  lost and alone in the 
forest.
 10 Tarik had worked in the company for 30 years and he rather  
orders by people who had been there only weeks.
23.2  Rewrite the sentences using one pair of words from the box. Use passive forms with past 
participle + -ing, past participle + to-inﬁ nitive, or past simple + being + past participle. A–D
 ask – show         catch – shoplifting        expect – attract        hear – argue  
 hate – tease        mind – criticise        observe – enter        require – complete
1 They wanted us to show our passports at the border. 
 We were asked to show our passports at the border.
2 They could hear Emil and Laura shouting at each other next door. 
 Emil and Laura  .
3  The other children made Ollie unhappy when they teased him. 
 Ollie  .
4 They saw the burglar getting into the museum through a window. 
 The burglar  .
5 They think that over 20,000 people will go to the pop concert. 
 The pop concert  .
6 They criticised her but she wasn’t unhappy about it. 
 She  .
7 They said I had to ﬁ ll in two copies of the customs declaration. 
 I  .
8 They caught Mrs Dee taking things from the shop. 
 Mrs Dee  .
23.3  Make passive sentences beginning with the italicised word(s). E
1 Kay’s questions began to irritate Marco. 
 Marco began to be irritated by Kay’s questions. (corresponding meaning)
2 The team captain hopes to select Omar.  
3 Alastair arranged to take Kathy to the station.  
4 Critics have come to recognise Galdos as one of Spain’s greatest novelists. 
5 The south coast continues to attract holidaymakers.   
6 Harris has agreed to interview the Finance Minister.  
 Do the sentences you have written have a corresponding meaning to the original, or a different 
meaning? Look carefully at the tense in the sentences given. 
Unit
A
B
C
D
Using passives
In English we usually prefer to put the topic (what is already being talked about) at the beginning of a 
sentence (or clause) and a comment on that topic at the end. Choosing the passive often allows us to 
do this. Compare these two texts and note where the topic (in italics) is placed in the second sentence 
of each. The second text uses a passive where the emphasis is on the (safety) valves:
 The three machines tested for the report contained different types of safety valve. The Boron 
Group in Germany manufactured all the valves.
 The three machines tested for the report contained different types of safety valve. All the 
valves were manufactured by the Boron Group in Germany.
Using the passive allows us to put long subjects at the end of a sentence. So, for example:
 I was surprised by Dev’s decision to give up his job and move to Sydney.
is more natural than ‘Dev’s decision to give up his job and move to Sydney surprised me’, although the 
choice can depend on considerations of style and context.
Instead of making a that-clause the subject of a passive sentence, it is normal to use an it-clause 
(see also Unit 25):
 Everybody believed (that) the plan would fail. (active)
 It was believed that the plan would fail. (passive) is more natural than
 That the plan would fail was believed by everybody.
Note also that some verbs have related nouns which express the same meaning. These nouns can be 
used as the subject of passive sentences, with a new passive verb introduced. Compare the example 
above and:
 The installation of the new computer system will be completed by next month.
We typically use a passive rather than an active in the 
following situations.
 Using a passive allows us to omit the agent (= the subject of the corresponding active sentence) by 
leaving out the prepositional phrase with by. We prefer passives when the agent:
– is not known:  My ofﬁ  ce was broken into when I was on holiday.
– is ‘people in general’:  An order form can be found on page 2.
– is unimportant:  He is thought to be somewhere in Russia.
– is obvious:  She is being treated in hospital. (the agent is clearly ‘medical staff’)
 In factual writing (e.g. describing procedures or processes) we often omit the agent, and use passives:
 Nuclear waste will still be radioactive even after 20,000 years, so it must be disposed of 
very carefully. It can be stored as a liquid in stainless-steel containers which are encased in 
concrete. The most dangerous nuclear waste can be turned into glass which will be stored in 
deep underground mines.
 In informal contexts, particularly in conversation, we often use active sentences with a subject such 
as people, somebody / someone, something, they, we, or you even when we do not know who the 
agent is. In more formal contexts, we often prefer to use a passive so that we can avoid any mention of 
an agent. Compare:
 They’re installing the new computer system next month. and
 The new computer system is being installed next month. (more formal)
48
24
Reminder ➜ Section D & Appendix 2
Unit
49
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 6 (page 243)
24.1  Write passive sentences about the development of an Olympic Games site starting with the 
italicised words. A & Appendix 2
24
24.2  Rewrite these sentences beginning with a noun formed from the italicised verb (with the 
if necessary). Use a passive form of the verb in brackets, and make any other necessary 
changes. B
1 They will consider the issue at next week’s meeting. (give) 
 Consideration will be given to the issue at next week’s meeting.
2 They will appoint a new managing director next week. (make)
3 People have accused the local council of corruption. (make)
4 They demolished the building in only two days. (complete)
5 They will present the trophy after the speeches. (make)
6 Local residents will certainly resist the proposed new industrial area. (expect)
24.3  Complete the text with appropriate forms (active or passive) of the verbs in brackets. A–D
1
2
5
3
4
7
8
Slowly but surely the coastline of Britain (1) is being worn away  (wear away) by an advancing 
sea. Th e country which once ‘ruled the waves’ now (2)  (rule) by them, with huge 
forces threatening to destroy vast areas of human and wildlife habitat. Already some of Britain’s last 
wild, natural areas (3)  (disappear), and experts (4)  (fear) 
that this is just the beginning. It (5)  (estimate) that there will be a 38–55 cm rise 
in average sea levels by the year 2100. According to the Department of the Environment, during the 
next 50 years at least 10,000 hectares of farmland (6)  (turn into) mud fl ats and 
salt marshes by the increases in sea levels. Rather than trying to prevent the erosion, the present 
government (7)  (use) a method of ‘managed retreat’ by creating new defences 
further inland and allowing low-lying coastal farmland (8)  ( abandon) to 
the sea. However, many of the country’s major cities could also (9)  (aff ect). 
London, Bristol and Cardiff   all (10) ................... ( expect) severe fl  ooding as our sea defences 
(11) (destroy) by the rising tides.
They are holding the rowing 
competition on the River 
Nene.
6
 They had completed the 
athletics track only a year 
after the city got the 
Olympics.
They were using the handball 
venue as a warehouse until a 
year ago.
They built the main stadium in under 
three years. 
The main stadium was 
built in under three years. 
They have designed the main 
stadium to accommodate 
many different sports.
They will take down the 
temporary stands after the 
Games.
They will have completed 
the basketball arena by the 
end of May. 
They should have ﬁ nished 
the badminton arena by now.
Unit
A
B
C
D
E
Reporting with passives; It is said that …
An alternative to it + passive verb + that-clause is to use subject + passive verb + to-inﬁ nitive if we 
want the subject to be the topic of the sentence (see Unit 24C). Compare:
 It is reported that the damage is extensive. and
 The damage is reported to be extensive.
Most of the verbs listed in the ﬁ rst white box in B can also be used in this pattern except for 
announce, decide, mention, propose, recommend, suggest.
We can only use tell in this pattern when it means ‘order’. So we can say:
 I was told (= ordered) to go with them to the railway station.
but not ‘The accident was told (= said) to have happened just after midnight’.
With some verbs we can also use it + passive verb + wh-clause to report information given or found 
out:
 It has now been revealed who was responsible for the accident.
 The decision to build the bridge was taken before it was established whether it was actually 
needed.
Also: discover, explain, ﬁ nd, know, reveal, show, understand
When a that-clause begins that + there …, we can make a corresponding passive form there + 
passive verb + to be / to have been. Compare:
 It is thought (that) there are too many obstacles to peace. and
 There are thought to be too many obstacles to peace.
We can use the same verbs in this pattern as with subject + passive verb + to-inﬁ nitive (see C).
Another common way of reporting what is said by an unspeciﬁ ed group of people is to use it + 
passive verb + that-clause (see Unit 33 for more on that-clauses). Using this pattern allows us to 
put important information at the end of the sentence (see Unit 24C):
 It is reported that the damage is extensive. (compare The damage is extensive, according to 
government sources.)
 It was decided that the meeting should be cancelled. (or It was decided to cancel the 
meeting.)
Also: allege, announce, assume, believe, calculate, claim, consider, demonstrate, discover, 
establish, estimate, expect, feel, ﬁ nd, know, mention, recommend, reveal, say, show, suggest, 
suppose, think, understand; agree, decide, hope, intend, plan, propose (can also be followed by 
a to-inﬁ nitive clause)
Note that many other verbs connected with reporting are not used with it + passive verb + that-
clause, but can be used as in A:
 We have been informed that we have to leave. 
(but not It has informed us …)
We often use a passive to report what people say, think, etc., particularly if it is not important to 
mention who is being reported:
 People in the area have been told that they should stay indoors.
 Everyone was asked to bring some food to the party.
50
25
Also: encourage, persuade, reassure, 
remind, tell, warn
These verbs need a personal object before the that-clause in an active form (e.g. They have informed 
us that …)
Unit
51
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 6 (page 243)
25. 1  Which of the verbs in brackets can complete the sentence? Underline one or both. B & D
1 It was  to hold new negotiations next month. (agreed / announced)
2 It has been  that the crash was the result of pilot error. (proposed / shown)
3 It was  that Mrs Ho would chair the meeting. (hoped / explained)
4 It has been  to appoint Dr Ahmadi as head teacher. (decided / suggested)
5 It has not yet been  who was responsible for the error. (claimed / explained)
6 It has now been that half of cancer cases are lifestyle-related. 
(established / revealed)
7 It is  to employ 500 people in the factory. (expected / intended)
8 It is  to close the library permanently from next April. (planned / recommended)
9 It is  that another moon landing will take place next year. (assumed / thought)
 10 It has been  how spiders are able to travel across the sea. (discovered / said)
25.2  If possible, rewrite these newspaper headlines as passive sentences with it. If not, write ✗. 
A & B
25
25.3  Write two new sentences for each numbered sentence below, using it + passive verb + that-
clause in one sentence and subject + passive verb + to-inﬁ nitive in the other. (The second 
pattern may not always be possible.) C
(1) We have discovered that a mechanical fault 
caused the problem. (2) We don’t think that the 
fault is serious. (3) We expect that it will take several 
weeks to correct the fault. (4) We have decided to 
postpone the next rocket launch, and (5) we suggest 
that the next launch should take place in May.
1 It has been discovered that a mechanical fault caused the problem. / A mechanical fault was 
discovered to have caused the problem.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
 10
AGREEMENT THAT UN WILL SEND IN TROOPS
It has been agreed that the UN will send in troops.
PATIENTS REASSURED ABOUT HOSPITAL SAFETY
WATER DISCOVERED ON MARS
TERRORISTS BELIEVED TO BE OPERATING IN BERLIN
MOON ASTRONAUTS EXPECTED TO RETURN TODAY
EX-PRESIDENT JULIUS REVEALED AS SPY
WARNING GIVEN ABOUT COMPUTER VIRUS
KING SAID TO BE MAKING GOOD RECOVERY
RESTAURANT ESTABLISHED AS SOURCE OF FOOD POISONING OUTBREAK
POLICE TOLD TO WORK LONGER HOURS
Unit
A
B
C
E
D
Wh-questions with who, whom, which, how and 
whose
When we use who or what as subjects, the verb that follows is usually singular, even if a plural answer 
is expected:
 What is there to see in the town? (expects an answer giving a number of things to see; 
not What are there to see in the town?)
However, the verb can be plural in echo questions (see Unit 27E) after a plural subject or a subject 
consisting of two or more noun phrases joined by and:
 ‘Mr Almeida and his family are here to see you.’ ‘ Who are here?’ (or Who’s here?)
and when who and what function as complements:
 Who are those people over there?  What are the consequences of the decision?
We can use whose to ask about the person that owns or is responsible for something. Whose can be 
used either before a verb (as a pronoun):
 Whose are these boots?
or before a noun or noun phrase (as a determiner) introducing direct or indirect questions:
 Whose boots are these?  She asked me whose coat I was wearing.
In formal contexts we can use a preposition before whose (see also Unit 55B):
 In whose desk was it found? (less formally Whose desk was it found in?)
However, in questions without a verb a preposition comes before whose:
 ‘We’re meeting at nine.’ ‘ In whose house?’ (not Whose house in?)
How or what?
How
 How was the journey? 
 (asking a general opinion)
 How is your brother? 
 (asking about general health)
 How do you like your coffee? 
 (asking about food and drink preferences)
What
 What was the journey like? 
 (asking a general opinion)
 What do you like about the job?
 (asking for details)
 What if your plan doesn’t work?
 (asking about consequences)
 What’s it called? (asking about a name)
How / What (about)
 How / What about a swim? (making a suggestion)
 ‘He’s a bit scary sometimes.’ ‘ How / What do you mean?’ (asking for more information)
We usually use which, rather than who or what, in questions before one(s) and of, as which is 
commonly used to ask or talk about a choice between one or more things:
 I’ve decided to buy one of these jumpers. Which one do you think I should choose?
 Which of you would like to go ﬁ rst? (rather than Who of …?)
Who refers to people, and can be used as subject, object or complement:
 Who owns that car?  Who did you meet?  Who was her father?
Whom is used as a formal alternative to who as object, and also directly after prepositions:
 Whom did you meet?  To whom were you talking?
Which is used to refer to people when we want to identify somebody in a group:
 ‘ Which is your brother?’ ‘The one next to Luka.’ (talking about a photograph)
and we can use which instead of who to talk about particular classes of people:
 Which do you think earns more, a teacher or a police ofﬁ cer? (or Who do you think …?)
52
26
Reminder ➜ Section E
Unit
53
Exercises
 26
26. 1  Underline the correct option (or both if possible). A & B
1 To whom / who should the documents be sent?
2 Which / Who of you is Dr Hansen? I have a message for you.
3 A: Here’s a photo of our children at the fancy dress party.   B: Who / Which is Isabella?
4 A: Is your sister at home?   B: What / Which one do you want to speak to?
5 Whom / Who do you hold responsible for the damage?
6 Who / Which will captain the team if Zeinab isn’t available?
7 Which / Who would you rather be – a doctor or a vet?
8 Who / Whom translated the book?
26.2  Complete the sentences with an appropriate present simple form of the verbs in brackets. C
1 What  those cakes made from? (be)
2 Who  you for Maths and English? (teach)
3 What  there to see on the island? (be)
4 Who  the major decisions in the company? (make)
5 A: The Turners are in France.   B: Who  in France? (be)
6 Who  their textbook with them? Put your hands up. (have)
26.3  First, complete the sentences with how, what, or how / what if both are possible. Then choose 
an appropriate answer for each question. D
1 ‘ What  do you like about your new job?’ g
2 ‘  if Omar calls while you’re out?’ 
3 ‘  about a coffee?’ 
4 ‘  are your parents these days?’ 
5 ‘ ’s your boss like?’ 
6 ‘  do you like your new job?’ 
7 ‘  was the camping trip?’ 
8 ‘ ’s your boss called?’ 
9 ‘  do you mean, “Smart clothes”?’ 
 10 ‘  was the camping trip like?’ 
a ‘It’s really boring.’
b ‘I’d love one.’
c ‘I mean you’ve got to wear a suit.’
d ‘Tell him I’ll call back.’
e ‘It was great.’
f  ‘Lucia Garcia.’
g  ‘It’s never boring.’
h ‘Quite well, thanks.’
i ‘We had an excellent time.’
j ‘She works us really hard.’
26.4  Correct any mistakes in the italicised words or, if necessary, suggest ways of making the 
sentence more natural. If the sentence is already correct, write ✓. B, C & E
1 Who’s caravan were you staying in? 
2 Whose are all these books? 
3 He asked us who’s car was parked in front of his house. 
4 A: Who live in the ﬂ at upstairs?   B: The Thompson family. 
5 Whose going with you to Canada? 
6 About whose travels in Nepal did Liam Wilson write a book? 
7 What one of the following statements is true? 
8 Who of us has not told a lie at some time in our lives? 
9 A: Can you post the books to us?   B: Whose address to? 
 10 A: Ants have got into the fridge!   B: What has got into the fridge? 
E
F
Echo questions
Echo questions are used when we haven’t understood what has been said or to check that we 
heard correctly, perhaps because we found it very surprising. We might repeat, usually with a rising 
intonation, the whole of what was said:
 ‘Tala’s lost her job.’ ‘Tala’s lost her job?’
or focus on part of what was said using a stressed wh-word or a phrase with how:
 ‘Leon’s arriving at 6:30.’ ‘ When’s Leon arriving? / Leon’s arriving when?’
 ‘We paid £3,000 for the painting.’ ‘ How much did you pay? / You paid how much?’
We can use what or ‘do’ what to focus on the verb or part of the sentence beginning with the verb:
 ‘We paid £3,000 for the painting.’ ‘You what?’ (or ‘You did what?’)
 ‘I think she’s having a sleep.’ ‘She’s what?’ (or ‘She’s doing what?’)
Questions with that-clauses
A wh-question can refer to a following that-clause, particularly after verbs such as expect, hope, 
reckon, say, suggest, suppose, and think. We can leave out that in these questions:
 When do you reckon (that) you’ll ﬁ nish the job?
However, when the wh-word is the subject, object or complement of the verb in the subordinate 
clause, we do not use that:
 What did you think was in the box? (not What did you think that was in the box?)
Unit
A
B
C
D
Negative questions; echo questions; questions with 
that-clauses
We can make a suggestion with Why not + verb or Why don’t / doesn’t … (but not Why do not / 
does not …):
 Why not decorate the house yourself? (or Why don’t you decorate …?)
Why didn’t … isn’t used to make a suggestion, but can show that we think an action was wrong. For 
example, depending on intonation and context, it can be used to criticise someone:
 Why didn’t you tell me that in the ﬁ rst place? (I’m annoyed that you didn’t)
Negative question forms, usually with a falling intonation, are used in exclamations giving opinions:
 Have n’t you grown!  Does n’t she look lovely!  Did n’t it snow a lot!
We sometimes use negative words other than -n’t such as never, no, nobody, nothing, nowhere:
 Why do you never help?
 Have you nowhere to go? (or Do you have nowhere to go?) 
or less emphatically or more informally:
 Why do n’t you ever help?
 Have n’t you got anywhere to go? (or Don’t you have anywhere …?)
Negative questions
We usually make a negative yes / no or wh-question with an auxiliary verb (have, did, would, etc.) 
+ -n’t to suggest, persuade, criticise, etc. 
 Wouldn’t it be better to go tomorrow?  Why don’t we go out for a meal?
In formal contexts, or when we want to give some special emphasis to the negative (perhaps to show 
that we are angry, very surprised, or to strongly persuade someone), we can use not after the subject 
in negative questions. This happens particularly in yes / no rather than wh-questions:
 Did she not realise that she’d broken it? (less emphatically Didn’t she realise that …?)
 Can you not get there a bit earlier? (less emphatically Can’t you …?)
54
27
Reminder ➜ E5– E7
Unit
55
Exercises
27 . 1 Write negative questions for B in these dialogues, using -n’t with the words in brackets. A
1 A: Can you lend me €10?
 B: Again? Haven’t you got any money left?  (… money left?)
2 A: I’m annoyed that you didn’t come to the meeting.
 B: Why?  (… my email / on holiday?)
3 A: I’ve had to bring the children with me.
 B: Why?  (… babysitter?)
4 A: I’ll just ﬁ nish my homework before I go to school.
 B: But  (… be supposed to / last night?)
5 A: I’ve put my bike in the sitting room.
 B: The sitting room!  (… outside?)
6 A: I’m taking the coach to Vienna.
 B: But that will take ages.  (… rather / plane?)
27 .2  Use the notes to complete these dialogues with two negative questions. In the ﬁ rst use -n’t; in 
the second use never, no, nobody, nothing or nowhere. B
1 ( ever / considered you might / wrong) 
A: Haven’t you ever considered you might be wrong? / Have you never considered  
  you might be wrong?
 B: No, I’m sure I’m right.
2 ( you / any interest / maths at all)   A: ? 
B: No, I’ve always hated it.
3 A: I spent the night in the railway station. ( could / ﬁ nd anywhere else / sleep)   
B: ?
4 ( can / remember anything about / accident)   A: 
?
B: Not after getting into the car, no.
5 ( why / ever do well / exams)   A: ? 
B: Perhaps you don’t revise enough.
6 ( there anybody / you can ask / help)   A: ?   
B: I can’t think of anyone.’
27 .3  Complete the echo questions using appropriate question words or phrases. E
1 A: Jake’s going to Chile.   B: He’s going where?  / He’s doing what?  / He’s what?  
2 A: He’s leaving at the end of next week.   
B: He’s leaving ?/ He’s doing ?/ He’s ?
3 A: He’ll be away for three months.   B: He’ll be away for ?/ He’ll ?
4 A: It will cost about £15,000.   B: It’ll cost ? / It’ll ?
5 A: He’s sold his house to pay for the trip.   
B: He’s sold ?/ He’s done ?/ He’s ?
6 A: He’s going climbing in the Andes.   
B: He’s going climbing ?/ He’s doing ?/ He’s ?
27 .4  If necessary, correct any mistakes in these sentences. Put a tick if they are already correct. 
C, D & F
1  A: Mariam isn’t answering her phone.   B: Why do you not email her? 
2  Who do you expect that will read your blog? 
3 Why did they suggest that we should avoid using the motorway? 
4  Was not it a brilliant ﬁ lm!
5  If she really wants to go rock climbing, why not let her?
6  What did you say that is in these biscuits?
7  How do you think that Twitter will have changed our lives in ten years’ time?
8  Why did not you tell me you’d changed your number?
27
Unit
A
B
C
D
E
F
Verbs, objects and complements
After some verbs we usually add a complement – a phrase which completes the meaning of a verb, 
noun or adjective – which is an adverb or prepositional phrase:
 The disease originated in Britain. (not The disease originated. We need to add something 
about where or how it originated.)
Other verbs usually have a complement but may not. Compare:
 He paused for a few moments.     and     He paused. (no complement needed)
Some verbs are commonly followed by a particular preposition or prepositions and then an object 
(see also Unit 94):
 We had to deal with hundreds of complaints. (not We had to deal.)
 I’m sure that blue car belongs to Murad. (not I’m sure that blue car belongs.)
Also: adhere to, aspire to, culminate in / with, detract from, 
differentiate between, incline to / towards, specialise in
Some verbs are usually followed by an object + prepositional phrase complement:
 I always associate pizza with Italy. ( not I always associate pizza.)
 She put the report on the ﬂ oor. ( not She put the report.)
Also: attribute … to, base … on / upon, equate … with, inﬂ ict … on, 
mistake … for, regard … as / with, remind … of
Some verbs are often followed by an object + adjective (or adjective phrase) complement:
 The people of this country will hold the government responsible.
 Conti pronounced herself ﬁ t for the match.
Also: assume, believe, consider, declare, ﬁ nd, judge, prove, report, think. 
(The object after declare, ﬁ nd, pronounce and prove is usually a reﬂ exive pronoun.)
Sentences with an object + adjective complement after these verbs are usually rather formal. Adding 
to be after the object or using a that-clause can make sentences less formal:
 Dr Adams argues that house prices will fall, but other economists believe the opposite true. 
(or less formally … believe the opposite to be true. or … believe that the opposite is true.)
Some transitive verbs don’t need an object when the meaning is clear from the context:
 I often sing (songs) in the shower. 
 She plays (the saxophone) beautifully.
Also: answer, ask, change, cook, dance, drink, drive, eat, fail, park, 
phone, read, smoke, study, wash, wash up, wave, win, write
Some verbs can be either transitive or intransitive, allowing us to focus on 
either the person or thing performing the action, or the person or thing 
affected by the action. Compare:
 She closed the door. (transitive) and     The door closed. (intransitive)
 I’ ve ripped my shirt. (transitive) and     My shirt has ripped. (intransitive)
Also: begin, bend, break, burn, change, decrease, drop, ﬁ nish, increase, 
move, open, shut, start, vary, wake (most are ‘change’ verbs)
56
28
Reminder ➜ F1– F3
Unit
57
Exercises
28. 1  If it is possible to omit the object (in italics) after the underlined verbs, put brackets around it.  B
Aya was (1) reading (a book) when the telephone rang. It was Val. She said, ‘I called you earlier, but 
nobody (2) answered the phone. Would you like to come over to (3) eat dinner tonight with me and 
Tom? Is eight/seven okay?’ Aya (4) thanked Val and said that she’d love to come. At about seven 
Aya started to get ready. She (5) washed herself and (6) brushed her hair. Then she (7) changed her 
clothes and (8) put on some makeup. After that, she (9) drove her car to Malstowe, the village where 
Val and Tom lived. Val was gardening when Aya (10) reached their house and she (11) waved her 
hand when saw Aya. Aya (12) parked her car on the drive and walked over to Val. Val said, ‘Tom’s still 
(13) cooking dinner, so I thought I had time (14) to pick some ﬂ owers. By the way, my sister Kate is 
staying with us. She’s (15) studying French at university, but is on holiday at the moment. I forgot to 
(16) mention her when I spoke to you earlier. I’ll (17) introduce you when we go inside.’ Aya 
(18) enjoyed the evening very much. The food was excellent and they talked a lot about their 
holiday plans. Aya hoped to go to Canada, but wasn’t sure yet that she could (19) afford it. Before 
she left, Aya helped (20) wash up the dishes. As she drove home, she decided that she must 
(21) invite Val and Tom for a meal at her house very soon.
28.2  Complete sentences 1–4 with a correct verb + preposition + noun phrase. Complete 5–8 with 
a correct verb + noun phrase + preposition. D & E
Verbs 
(Use an appropriate form.)
Prepositions Noun phrases
 aspire         attribute        
 base        culminate        
 differentiate        inﬂ ict        
 mistake        specialise
between        for        
in        in        on   
on         to         to  
the black car         national leadership         
his success        
the discovery of penicillin                
a surprise defeat        fantasy and reality
her new novel        seafood
1 Electors deserve more from a political party that aspires to national leadership  .
2 Years of research by Fleming  .
3 Her mental condition makes it difﬁ cult for her to  .
4 There’s a great restaurant by the harbour which  .
5 The team of amateur footballers   the ﬁ rst division leaders.
6 After Lewis’s victory, he  the advice of his new trainer.
7 It was dark and raining and she  a taxi.
8 Emma Janse has  events that took place in 16th-century Denmark.
28.3  Complete these sentences with any appropriate adjective. F
1 The scientiﬁ  c evidence proved him guilty  .
2 She declared herself  with the result.
3 They considered the food  .
4 I’m surprised the plumber hasn’t turned up. I’ve always found him  .
5 We believed her  at school.
 Now write less formal versions using either to be after the object or a that-clause.
1 The scientiﬁ  c evidence proved him to be guilty. / The scientiﬁ c evidence proved that he was guilty.
28
Unit
A
B
C
D
Verb + two objects
Some verbs that are followed by two objects cannot have their objects reversed with for / to:
 We all envied him his lifestyle. (but not We all envied his lifestyle for / to him.)
Also: allow, ask, cost, deny, forgive, guarantee, permit, refuse
Some verbs, such as describe and ﬁ x, can only have a second object if this is a prepositional object – 
 with to (see also Unit 22A). Compare:
 She described the situation (to me). (but not 
She described me the situation.) and
 She told this joke (to me). or She told me this 
joke.  
 with for. Compare:
 He ﬁ xed the tap (for me). (but not He ﬁ xed me the tap.) and
 I booked a room (for her). or I booked her a room. 
Some verbs can be used with either for or to. Often there is a difference in meaning: to suggests that 
there is a transfer of something to someone, and for suggests that someone beneﬁ ts from something. 
Compare:
 I hadn’t got time to visit Mira, so I wrote a letter to her. and
 Mira had broken her wrist, so I wrote a letter for her.
Also: bring, leave, pay, play, post, read, sell, send, sing, take
Sometimes, however, the meaning is very similar:
 He played the piece to (or for) me.
 Can you sing that song again to (or for) us?
Note that when object + object is used after these verbs it usually has a similar meaning to the verb 
with object + to + object. For example:
 I sold him the car. ( means I sold the car to him, not I sold the car for him.)
Some verbs can be followed by two objects. Usually the ﬁ rst object (= the indirect object (IO)) is a 
person or group of people and the second object (= the direct object (DO)) is a thing:
 Can you bring me (= IO) some milk (= DO) from the shops?
 He made himself (= IO) a cup of coffee. (= DO).
Many verbs that can have two objects may also be used with a DO only (e.g. I read a story). With 
many verbs that can have two objects, it is possible to reverse the order of the objects if we put for or 
to before the IO (this is then called a prepositional object). Compare:
 I built my daughter a doll’s house. and
 I built a doll’s house for my daughter.
 Can you pass me that bandage? and
 Can you pass that bandage to me?
58
29
Other verbs with for + object: book, buy, catch, 
choose, cook, fetch, ﬁ nd, get, make, order, 
pour, save
Other verbs with to + object: award, give, hand, 
lend, offer, owe, show, teach, tell, throw
Also: admit, announce, demonstrate, 
explain, introduce, mention, point out, 
prove, report, say, suggest
Also: collect, mend, repair
We often use this pattern if we want to focus particular attention on the object after for / to. We also 
use it if the IO is a lot longer than the DO:
 Jasmin taught music to a large number of children at the school. (not Jasmin taught a large 
number of children at the school music.)
If the DO is a pronoun, a pattern with DO + preposition + IO is usual. Patterns without a preposition 
are avoided because they are considered to be bad style:
 I gave them to Isa. (rather than I gave Isa them. / I gave them Isa.)
 We bought it for them. (rather than We bought them it. / We bought it them.)
Unit
59
Exercises
29. 1  Complete each sentence with a suitable form of a verb from the box and insert to or for in an 
appropriate place. Write to / for if either can be used. A & B
choose        offer        pass         pay         post        read        save        sell        take        teach
1 Elias hasn’t got any money so I’ll have to pay  the bill  him.
2 Kaspar hates going shopping. I have to  his clothes him.
3 You’re staying with Dimitra at the weekend, aren’t you? Can you  this present her?
4 I can’t reach the salt. Could you  it me, please?
5 When Mr Durand bought the house, we  all the carpets him as well.
6 He’s got a very rewarding job. He  sports disabled children.
7 I haven’t got my glasses. Can you  these instructions me, please?
8 Jane  the letter me on her way to work because I had ﬂ u and couldn’t go out.
9 I  my old bike him, but he said he wanted something more modern.
 10 I’ll be in late tonight. Can you  some dinner me, please?
29.2  If necessary, correct these sentences. If the sentence is already correct, write ✓. C & D
1 He kindly collected me some library books.
2 He admitted his error for his colleagues.
3 I have to prepare a report for the meeting.
4 Can I ask a favour to you?
5 A special ticket allows entry for people to all the museums in the city.
6 I’d like to introduce you to my sister.
29.3  Complete these texts with objects chosen from the box. Give all possible word orders and add 
prepositions where necessary. A–D  
the problem / our teacher her photograph / me the glass / him
another half an hour / us his sister / me three bedtime stories / him
 an email /  him  his broken car / him the money / me
a drink / Ben a paper aeroplane / him  the problem / him 
a fortune / you
1 A: Samuel phoned. He wants to come and stay with us at the beginning of September.   
B: But that’s when my parents will be with us. I’ll have to send 
 him an email / an email to him  to explain the problem to him.
2 When he described  I didn’t think I knew her, but when he showed 
 I realised that I had seen her at work.
3 The clock on the wall was wrong. When we pointed out  , 
she allowed  to ﬁ nish the exam.
4 My three-year-old nephew, Luis, always keeps me busy when I babysit. Last night I ﬁ rst had to 
make  , then I had to 
mend  and after that he 
insisted that I read  .
5 A: Your new motorbike must have cost  .   
B: Well, actually, my parents lent  .
6 I poured  
and gave  .
29
for
Unit
A
B
C
D
E
Verb + -ing forms and inﬁ nitives 1
Other verbs can be followed by different prepositions + -ing. For example:
 by + -ing (begin, close, end, ﬁ nish (off / up), open, start (off / out))
 Can you begin by cleaning the ﬂ oors, and then do the windows?
 on + -ing or on + object + -ing (concentrate, count, depend, focus, insist, rely)
 Clare insisted on (Jack) wearing a suit to the party.
 of + -ing or of + object + -ing (approve, hear, know, speak, talk, tell)
 Have you ever heard of (anyone) getting arrested for gossiping before?
 object + from + -ing (deter, discourage, keep, prevent, prohibit, stop)
 The noise from next door prevented me from sleeping.
Some verbs (feel, hear, notice, observe, overhear, see, watch) can be followed by an object and 
then either by an -ing form or bare inﬁ nitive, but the meanings may be slightly different. Compare:
 I saw them playing football from my window. (-ing indicates an action in progress) and
 I saw him smash the bottle. (bare inﬁ nitive indicates a completed action)
 I was able to watch them building the new car park from my ofﬁ ce window. (-ing suggests 
that I watched, but not from start to ﬁ nish) and
 I watched him climb through the window, and then I called the police. (bare inﬁ nitive 
suggests I watched the whole action from start to ﬁ nish)
After the verbs dare and help we can use either a bare inﬁ nitive or to-inﬁ nitive:
 I was angry with him, but I didn’t dare (to) say anything.
 We hope the Twitter campaign will help (to) raise awareness of the problem.
When dare has an object, we can only use a to-inﬁ nitive. Compare:
 I dared him to cross the river. (not I dared him cross …) and
 I helped them (to) pack.
After have, let and make we can use an object + bare inﬁ nitive but not to-inﬁ nitive:
 His exam results might make him work harder. (not … might make him to work …)
 I had Irena clean up her bedroom before I let her go out to play.
Some verbs can be followed by to + -ing where to is a preposition:
 She confessed to stealing the money.
 You don’t object to working late tonight, do you?
Some verbs can be followed either by an object + -ing or a possessive + 
-ing with a similar meaning, although the possessive + -ing form is usually 
considered to be rather formal:
 I resented Tom winning the prize.
 ( more formally I resented Tom’s winning the prize.)
 Mia recalled him buying the book. 
 ( more formally Mia recalled his buying the book.)
60
30
Reminder ➜ F4– F13
Also: detest, (dis)approve of, (dis)like, 
hate, love, object to (= ‘(dis)liking’ 
verbs); forget, imagine, remember, 
think of (= ‘thinking’ verbs)
Also: adapt, adjust, admit, look 
forward, own up, resort
Note that we only use a possessive form (Tom’s, his) here to talk about a person or group of people:
 I remember the horse winning the race. (but not … the horse’s winning …)
Note that these verbs can also be followed by to + noun phrase:
 She confessed to the crime.  You don’t object to the work, do you?
Unit
61
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 7 (page 244)
30
30. 1  If possible, rewrite these sentences using the possessive form of the object. If not, write ✗. A
1 I really hate you having to be away from home so much. 
I really hate your having to be away from home so much.  
2 We don’t approve of the developer locating the factory so close to houses.
3 I have always detested the dog jumping up at me when I visit them.
4 No one heard the man shouting for help.
5 It is difﬁ cult to imagine him accepting the decision without any objection.
6 No one in the crowd that day will forget Ashe ﬁ ghting so hard to win the match.
7 I remember them arguing a great deal when they were children.
8 The police investigated him stealing cars from the city centre.
30.2  Rewrite the italicised part of each sentence so that it has a similar meaning. Use one of the 
verbs from the box and an -ing form.  B & C
adapt        approve        discourage        end         own up         rely
1  In a survey, 65% of dentists said that they had made mistakes in treating patients. 
owned up to making
2 I don’t think children should wear jewellery in school. 
3 I would like to ﬁ nish with a summary of the main points of my talk. 
4 My parents said they thought I shouldn’t go to university. 
5 You can’t trust Sophie to turn up on time. 
6 I grew up in the countryside, and I found it difﬁ cult to get used to life in a big city. 
30.3  Underline the most likely verb form. Consider why it is the most likely. A
1 I heard the tyre burst / bursting and then the lorry skidded across the road.
2 Carl noticed someone watch / watching him from an upstairs window.
3 She felt the wasp sting / stinging her just before she brushed it off her arm.
4 With a good telescope you can see the eagles feed / feeding their chicks in the nest.
30.4  Match the sentence beginnings and endings, adding an appropriate object where necessary 
and write (to) where this might be included. E
1 When Lana thought of going on the roller-coaster it made …
2 The new course is intended to help …
3 Scientists hope the new drug will help …
4 We didn’t agree with the decision, but we didn’t dare …
5 When Ethan arrives, have …
6 The dial on the left lets …
a  prevent hay fever.
b  feel quite ill. 
c  control the speed of the fan.
d  wait outside my ofﬁ ce.
e  understand modern art.
f  protest against it.
1 + b When Lana thought of going on the roller-coaster it made her feel quite ill.  

Unit
A
B
C
Verb + -ing forms and inﬁ nitives 2
A number of other to-inﬁ nitive and -ing forms can also follow verbs –
 verb + negative to-inﬁ nitive and negative -ing forms
 We decided not to go to Paris after all. (compare The people didn’t decide to go to war, it 
was their political leaders.)
 Some of my friends have considered not going to college because of the cost. (compare I 
haven’t considered going to college – I don’t want to go on studying after school.)
 verb + to have + past participle
 The accident seems to have happened at around 1 pm yesterday.
 Simmons is alleged to have assaulted a police ofﬁ cer.
This form is often used to give an opinion (after verbs like seem and appear) about a past event, or 
to report what is or was said (after passive verbs like is / was alleged, believed, said, thought) about 
past events.
 verb + having + past participle
The verb + -ing and verb + having + past participle forms have a similar meaning with these verbs:
 I now regret buying the car.    and   I now regret having bought the car.
This form is most often used with admit, deny, forget, recall, regret and remember.
After some verbs we have to put a preposition, usually for, immediately after the verb before an 
object + to-inﬁ nitive (see also Unit 29):
 They arranged for Rania to stay in London. 
(not They arranged Rania to stay …)
 They applied for the court appearance to be 
postponed. 
Other verbs can be followed by different prepositions + object + to-inﬁ nitive. For example:
 at + object + to-inﬁ nitive (go on [= to criticise continually], keep on [= to talk about something many 
times], scream, shout, yell)
 I shouted at the man to open the door.
 on + object + to-inﬁ nitive (call [= to ofﬁ cially ask someone to do something], count, depend, prevail, 
rely)
 We ’re depending on you to ﬁ nd a solution soon.
 to + object + to-inﬁ nitive (appeal, gesture, motion, signal)
 He closed the door and signalled to the pilot to take off.
After some verbs we need to include an object before a to-inﬁ nitive 
in active sentences:
 The police warned everyone to stay inside 
with their windows closed. (not The police 
warned to stay …)
62
31
Also: advise, allow, believe, cause, 
command, enable, encourage, entitle, 
force, invite, order, persuade, remind, 
show, teach, tell
After other verbs, however, we can’t include an object before a to-inﬁ nitive:
 We ’ve decided to leave early. 
(not We’ve decided us to leave early.) Also: agree, consent, fail, hope, 
manage, offer, pretend, refuse, start, 
threaten, volunteer
Also: advertise, campaign, long, plan, 
wait (After apply and campaign, the 
to-inﬁ nitive is usually passive.)
Reminder ➜ F4– F13
Unit
63
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 7 (page 244)
31
31.1  Complete each sentence with one of the verbs in brackets. A
1 a My mother  me to throw away my old toys. ( threatened / told)
 b My mother  to throw away my old toys.
2 a They  to visit Riko in hospital. ( allowed / offered)
 b They  us to visit Riko in hospital.
3 a I  to carry the heavy boxes up the stairs. ( managed / persuaded)
 b I  Hamza to carry the heavy boxes up the stairs.
4 a She  Lars to help in the garden. ( agreed / encouraged)
 b She  to help in the garden.
5 a I  her to tidy up the house. ( pretended / reminded)
 b I  to tidy up the house.
6 a Jonas  to study economics at university. ( advised / hoped)
 b Jonas  me to study economics at university.
31.2  Write one word that is missing from each line in these texts. Put a  where the word 
should be. B
a
1
2
3
4
When I advertised  a website designer for the business, Greta got 
the job. But I’ve now learnt that you can’t rely Greta to do anything. 
I waited ages her to come up with some initial ideas for the site, and 
then I had to keep on her to do any more work on it. Finally, she said 
she couldn’t do it after all.
for
b
1
2
3
4
Managers of the National Electricity Company have appealed workers 
to end their strike, and have called the government to intervene in the 
dispute. The Energy Minister said that he has arranged employers and 
employees to meet next week, and he prevailed strikers to return to 
work in the meantime. 
31.3  Complete the sentences with the verbs in brackets using one of the patterns in section C 
opposite. Give alternatives where possible. C
1 I  anyone Marta’s new address. (agree – not tell)
2 The prisoners  through a 
broken window last night. (think – escape)
3 I  him at the conference. (not recall – see)
4 He  any stolen property. (deny – receive)
5 He  as the person 
who donated the money. (ask – not name)
6 She  
all the way back home. (not feel like – walk)
7 I am sure my purse was on the table a few minutes ago, 
but now it  
(seem – disappear)
8 The Etruscans  
in Italy in the 8th or 9th century BC. (believe – arrive)

Unit
A
B
C
D
Reporting people’s words and thoughts
Negatives in reporting
To report what somebody didn’t say or think, we make the reporting verb negative:
 He didn’t tell me how he would get to London.
If we want to report a negative sentence, then we usually report this in the reported clause:
 ‘You’re right, it isn’t a good idea.’ → He agreed that it wasn’t a good idea. 
although it may be reported in the reporting clause, depending on meaning:
 ‘I disagree. It’s not a good idea at all.’ → He didn’t agree that it was a good idea.
However, with some verbs, to report a negative sentence we usually make the verb in the reporting 
clause negative:
 ‘I expect he won’t come.’/ ‘I don’t expect he will come.’ → She didn’t expect him to come. 
Also: believe, feel, intend, plan, propose, suppose, think, want
Reporting questions
To report a wh-question we use a reporting clause and a clause with a wh-word:
 She asked me what the problem was.   I asked him where to go next.
When we report a yes / no question we use a reporting clause followed by a clause beginning with 
either if or whether (but note that we can’t use if + to-inﬁ nitive; see Unit 34):
 Liz wanted to know if / whether we had any photos of our holiday.
The usual word order in a wh-, if-, or whether-clause is the one we would use in a statement:
 ‘Have you seen Paul recently?’ → She wanted to know if I had seen Paul recently.
However, if the original question begins what, which, or who followed by be + complement, we can 
put the complement before or after be in the report:
 ‘Who was the winner?’ → I asked who the winner was. (or … who was the winner.)
Note that we don’t use a form of do in the wh-, if-, or whether-clause:
 She asked me where I found it. ( not … where did I ﬁ nd it. /… where I did ﬁ nd it.)
However, if we are reporting a negative question, we can use a negative form of do:
 He asked (me) why I didn’t want anything to eat.
If the exact words are important, we might report the actual words someone said. In writing this is 
done in a quotation:
 ‘I suppose you’ve heard the latest news,’ she said to me. 
 ‘Of course,’ Carter replied, ‘you’ll have to pay him to do the job.’
The reporting clause can come before, within, or at the end of the quotation.
In the English used in stories and novels, the reporting verb (e.g. ask, continue) is often placed before 
the subject when the reporting clause comes after the quotation except when the subject is a pronoun:
 ‘When will you be back?’ asked Jimin. ( or … Jimin asked.)
 ‘And after that I moved to Italy,’ she continued. ( not … continued she.)
Quoting and reporting in our own words
When we report what people think or what they have said, we often give the information using our 
own words. We do this with sentences that have a reporting clause and a reported clause (see also 
Units 33–39):
reporting clause reported clause
She explained
He didn’t tell me
(that) she couldn’t take the job until January.
where to put the boxes.
64
32
Reminder ➜ G1– G11
Unit
65
Exercises
 32
32.1  Report what was said, quoting the speaker’s exact words using one of the reporting verbs from 
the box. Put the reporting clause after the quotation and give alternative word orders where 
possible. B & G8–G11
boast        chorus         command         confess        explain        grumble        suggest        wonder
1 Come in out of the rain now. ( her mother)
‘Come in out of the rain now,’ commanded her mother / her mother commanded.
2 Why don’t we stop for a coffee? ( she)
3 All right, Georgia, it was me. ( he)
4 My novel is more exciting than a Dan Brown thriller. ( she)
5 I always carry two umbrellas with me because I’m always losing them. ( Lena)
6 Oh, no, it’s raining again. ( Matt)
7 Good morning, Miss Novak. ( the children)
8 Have I done the right thing? ( I)
32.2  Complete each sentence using a pair of verbs from the box. Make one of the verbs negative. C
announce – go        expect – be        feel – could         intend – hurt         
insist – be        promise – would        think – would        threaten – repay
1 ‘I didn’t mean to upset Astrid.’ → He didn’t intend to hurt  her feelings.
2 ‘I won’t give you the money back if you keep on at me.’ → He   the 
money if she kept on at him.
3 ‘I can’t ask my parents to help me again.’ → He  that he  ask his 
parents to help him again.
4 ‘I wasn’t anywhere near the school at the time of the break-in.’ → He  that he 
 anywhere near the school at the time of the break-in.
5 ‘I’m not going back to college.’ → She  that she   back to college.
6 ‘I was surprised that Mum was angry.’ → He  his mother  angry.
7 ‘Adam won’t mind waiting.’ → She  Adam  mind waiting.
8 ‘I won’t be late again.’ → She  that she be late again.
32.3  Complete the email by reporting these questions using a wh-, if- or whether-clause. D
1  ‘How did you hear about the job?’
2  ‘What are your long-term career plans?’
3  ‘How many languages do you speak?’
4  ‘Where did you learn Chinese?’
5  ‘Can you use a spreadsheet?’
6  ‘Have you organised international conferences before?’
7  ‘Would you be willing to live overseas for periods of time?’
8  ‘When can you start work?’
Hi Karim,
The interview went well, although it was long and they asked lots of questions. First, they wondered 
(1) how I’d heard about the job  , and then they asked me (2)  . 
They were very interested in the travelling I’d done. They asked me (3)  , 
and they wondered (4)  . There were questions about my previous 
experience. They wanted to know (5)  , and they asked me 
(6)  . At the end they asked (7)  
 . When I said ‘Yes’, they asked me (8)  !
I’ll phone later and tell you more about it. 
Emily
Unit
A
B
C
D
Reporting statements: that-clauses
If we use a that-clause after an active form of some verbs, we must include an object between the 
verb and the that-clause. This object can’t be a prepositional object (see D below):
 I notiﬁ ed the bank that I had changed my address. (but not I notiﬁ ed that I … / I notiﬁ ed to 
the bank that I …)
Also: assure, convince, inform, persuade, reassure, remind, tell
However, after some other verbs an object before a that-clause is not always necessary:
 They  promised (me) that they would come to the party. 
Also: advise, show, teach, warn
After some verbs we can use a that-clause with or without a personal object before the that-clause. 
However, if we do include an object, we put a preposition before it.
 After some verbs we use to:
 She admitted (to me) that she was seriously ill.
 I pointed out (to the driver) that he had parked 
across the entrance.
 After some verbs we use with:
 We agreed (with Ella) that the information should go no further.
Also: argue, check, disagree, joke
 After the verbs ask, demand and require we use of:
 The club asks (of its members) that they pay their fees by 31st December.
 The company demands (of its staff) that they should be at work by 8:30.
This pattern is usually used in formal contexts. Less formally we can use a to-inﬁ nitive clause after 
ask and require (e.g. The club asks its members to pay their fees by 31st December). However, we 
can’t use a to-inﬁ nitive clause after demand (not The company demands its staff to …).
Some reporting verbs which are followed by a that-clause have an alternative with an object + 
to-inﬁ nitive (often to be), although the alternatives are often rather formal. Compare:
 I felt that the results were satisfactory. and
 I felt the results to be satisfactory. 
When we report statements, we often use a that-clause in the reported 
clause (see Unit 32):
 He said (that) he was enjoying his work.
 The members of the Security Council warned that further action may be taken.
After the more common reporting verbs such as agree, mention, notice, promise, say, and think, we 
often leave out that, particularly in informal speech. However, it is not usually left out – 
 after less common reporting verbs such as complain, conﬁ de, deny, grumble, speculate, warn (and 
after the common reporting verbs answer, argue, and reply)
 in formal writing
 if the that-clause doesn’t immediately follow the verb:
 She agreed with her parents and brothers that it would be safer to buy a car than a motorbike. 
(rather than … and brothers it would be safer …)
66
33
Reminder ➜ G1– G7
Also: acknowledge, assume, believe, 
consider, declare, expect, ﬁ nd, presume, 
report, think, understand
Also: announce, complain, confess, 
explain, indicate, mention, propose, 
recommend, report, say, suggest
Unit
67
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 8 (page 245)
33
33. 1  Underline the correct verb. If both are possible, underline them both. C
1 The doctors advised / persuaded that I should rest for three months.
2 The police assured / promised residents that everything possible was being done to catch the 
thieves.
3 A spokesperson for the company reminded / warned that there may be delays on the railways this 
summer due to major engineering work.
4 We should inform / teach children that diet is of vital importance to health.
5 Russian scientists have shown / have convinced that honey can prevent the growth of bacteria.
6 The company has reassured / has advised customers that cars ordered before 1st August would be 
delivered by the end of the month.
7 Katarina told / promised that she would be home before midnight.
33.2  If possible, rewrite these sentences in a more formal way with a to-inﬁ nitive clause. If not, 
write ✗ . B
1 Two days after the launch Houston reported that the satellite was missing. 
 Two days after the launch Houston reported the satellite to be missing.  
2 The employees argued that the reduction in wages was unlawful.
3 The judge thought that his explanation was unconvincing.
4 I expected that her plans would fail.
5 She stressed that her stories were aimed primarily at children.
6 Lucas acknowledged that his chances of winning the race were slim.
7 We found that the rugby supporters were very well behaved.
8 The president’s spokesman commented that the election result was a victory for democracy.
33.3  Complete each sentence with an appropriate form of a verb from the box + to, with, or of. 
More than one verb may be possible, but use each verb at least once. D
announce        complain        disagree        joke        mention        require
1 Martina  the shop assistant that the laptop she’d bought there was faulty.
2 She  her neighbours that their dog was keeping her awake at night.
3 He  his friends that he’d won the lottery and was going to Barbados.
4 The minister  shocked journalists that she was to resign immediately.
5 The college   its students that they attend all classes.
6 I  Mr Jacobs that the students were lazy. I thought they were very enthusiastic.
7 I forgot to  Chris that I’d be home late.
33.4  Suggest corrections to the italicised words in this news article. A, C & D
PIK TO CUT WORKFORCE
PIK, the toy manufacturer, (1) has warned they are to make over 100 employees redundant over the next 
month. Managing Director Beth Edwards yesterday (2) explained employees that a national fall in demand 
for traditional toys is to blame. She (3) confessed her audience that management had been surprised by 
the downturn, but she (4) denied management had been incompetent. When asked whether staff would 
receive redundancy pay, Ms Edwards (5) replied an announcement would be made within a few days, but 
(6) reassured that they would receive fi nancial compensation. She (7) went on to complain government 
help for small  businesses was insuffi cient and (8) demanded ministers that they provide more support. 
She (9) asked staff that they continue to work as normal until details of the redundancies were given. She 
(10) reassured that the company would not close completely.
Unit
A
B
C
E
F
D
Verb + wh-clause
We can often use the way instead of how referring to either the route or the means:
 Go back the way (that / by which) you came. (or informally Go back how you came.)
 Have you noticed the way (that / in which) he spins the ball? (or … noticed how he spins …?)
Note that we don’t use ‘the way how’. (e.g. not Go back the way how you came.)
Note the difference between these sentences. The ﬁ rst has a wh-clause with whether and the second 
has a that-clause (see Unit 33):
 I didn’t know whether the shop was shut. (= if the shop was shut or not)
 I didn’t know that the shop was shut. (suggests that the shop was shut)
In rather formal contexts, particularly in writing, we can use as to with a meaning similar to ‘about’ or 
‘concerning’ before a wh-clause. This is most common before whether:
 Opinion was divided as to whether the ﬁ ndings from the study were representative of the 
population as a whole. (or less formally … divided whether …)
Whether
We can use whether as the wh-word in a wh-clause when we want to show possible choices. 
Whether has a similar meaning to ‘if’ (see Unit 86):
 He couldn’t remember whether / if he had turned the computer off. 
Some verbs can be followed by whether + to-inﬁ nitive to talk about the choice between two or more 
possibilities. Note that ‘if’ is never used before a to-inﬁ nitive:
 You have 14 days to decide whether to keep it or not. (not … to decide if to keep it or not.)
Also: choose, consider, debate, determine, discuss, know (in questions and negatives), 
think about, wonder (= ‘talking’ or ‘thinking about choices’ verbs)
Some other ‘talking’ and ‘thinking about choices’ verbs are not used with whether + to-inﬁ nitive, 
including ask, conclude, explain, imagine, realise, speculate, think. 
Some verbs must have an object before the wh-clause:
 She reminded me what (I had) to do.
 I told Linda how to get to my house.
The verbs ask and show often have an object before a wh-clause, but not always:
 I asked (him) how I could get to the station, and he told me.
These verbs can also be followed by object + wh-word + to-inﬁ nitive:
 She taught me how to play chess.
 I showed her where to put her coat.
Some verbs can be followed by a clause beginning with a wh-word (how, what, when, where, which, 
who, or why):
 That might explain why he’s unhappy. 
 I couldn’t decide which train to catch.
 Let’s consider how we can solve the problem.
Many of these verbs can also be followed by –
 a that-clause (see Unit 33):
 I decided that I ought to leave.
 a wh-clause (except ‘why’) + to-inﬁ nitive:
 Did you ﬁ nd out where to go?
Note that if we add a subject in the wh-clause we don’t use a to-inﬁ nitive:
 I can’t imagine what he likes about jazz.
68
34
Also: advise, inform, instruct, teach, warn
Also: arrange, calculate, check, choose, 
debate, determine, discover, discuss, 
establish, ﬁ nd out, forget, guess, 
imagine, know, learn, notice, plan, 
realise, remember, say, see, talk about, 
think (about), understand, wonder 
Unit
69
Exercises
34. 1  Match sentence beginnings 1–10 to endings a–j and choose an appropriate wh-word to 
connect them. If necessary, add an appropriate object. A & B
1 Before the meeting ﬁ  nished they arranged …  a  … to ﬁ  t the parts back together.
2 He took my hands and showed … b  … she went after that.
3 I explained carefully so that the students c  … to put their coats.
 understood … d  … to meet next. 
4 Anna was new in the ofﬁ ce and I had to keep e  … Helen wasn’t with him.
 reminding … f  … many sweets were in the jar.
5 I saw Sarah leave the building, but I didn’t notice … g  … they had to do in the test.
6 When I saw Hugo alone at the party I wondered … h  … the path was dangerous.
7 As we walked over the hills the guide warned … i  … everyone was.
8 After I’d dismantled the motor I couldn’t remember … j  … to hold the golf club properly.
9 To win a prize you had to guess … 
 10 As the guests came in Diego told …
1 + d Before the meeting finished they arranged when / where to meet next.
34.2  Underline the correct or more appropriate verb. D
1 She was thinking / debating whether to invite Jeremy over for dinner.
2 The council is meeting this morning to discuss / ask whether to increase local taxes.
3 Apparently Louis and Eva are considering / speculating whether to emigrate to Australia.
4 I have to imagine / choose whether to get a job or apply to go to college.
5 Scientists will have to decide / conclude soon whether to start testing the new drugs on people.
34.3  Zak Miles has written a book about mountain climbing in the Andes. Correct any mistakes in 
these extracts. A–F
34
As the snow got heavier I began to realise whether my life was in danger. Fortunately, 
my years in the Andes had taught what to do in extreme conditions. I knew that 
there was a shepherd’s hut somewhere on this side of the mountain that I could 
shelter in, but I didn’t know that it was nearby or miles away.
When the snow started falling it was very light, and I couldn’t decide if to carry on 
or go back down. Soon, however, I couldn’t see where to go.
,ZRQGHUHGLIWRUHWUDFHP\VWHSVDQGWU\WRÀ QGWKHWUDFNDJDLQEXWE\WKHWLPH
I decided whether I should go back, the track had disappeared.
The villagers warned  what the conditions were like at higher altitudes, and 
advised to take enough food for a week. There was some discussion through the day 
as whether the snow would arrive before my descent from the mountain, but I never 
imagined how hard the conditions would be. In the morning they showed me the way 
how to get to the track up the mountain.
me
Unit
A
B
C
Tense choice in reporting
Verb tense in the reporting clause
To report something said or thought in the past, the verb in the reporting clause is often in a past 
tense:
 Just before her wedding, she revealed that she had been married before.
When we report current news, opinions, etc. we can use a present tense for the verb in the reporting 
clause. In some cases, either a present or past tense is possible, although we prefer a present tense to 
emphasise that what was said is true or still relevant when we report it:
 She says that she’ll have to close the shop unless business improves. (or … said …)
We often prefer a present rather than a past tense –
 to report information that we have been told or heard, but don’t know whether it is true:
 I hear you’re unhappy with your job.
 to report what is said by some authority:
 The law says that no one under the age of 16 can buy a lottery ticket.
 to report what many people say:
 Every teacher I’ve spoken to tells me that standards of spelling are in decline.
When the situation described in the reported clause is a permanent / habitual situation, or still exists or 
is relevant at the time we are reporting it, then we use a present tense (or present perfect) if we also 
use a present tense for the verb in the reporting clause:
 Dr Weir thinks that he spends about ﬁ ve minutes on a typical appointment with a patient.
 US scientists claim that they have developed a new vaccine against malaria.
Note that the present perfect focuses attention on the result of the action, not the action itself.
However, when we use a past tense in the reporting clause we can use either a present or past tense 
(or present perfect or past perfect) in the reported clause:
 She argued that Carl is / was the best person for the job.
 They noted that the rate of inﬂ ation has / had slowed down.
Choosing a present tense (or present perfect) in the reported clause emphasises that the situation 
being reported still exists or is still relevant when we report it.
If we are not sure that what we are reporting is necessarily true, or a situation may not still exist now, 
we prefer a past rather than a present tense. Compare:
 Yasemin told me that she has two houses. (= might suggest that this is true) and
 Yasemin told me that she had two houses. (= might suggest either that this is perhaps not 
true, or that she once had two houses but doesn’t have two houses now)
Verb tense in the reported clause
When the situation described in the reported clause (see Unit 32) is in the past when we are reporting 
it, we use a past tense (past simple, past continuous, etc.):
 ‘I don’t want anything to eat.’ → Yusuf said that he didn’t want anything to eat.
 ‘I’m leaving!’ → Lamar announced that she was leaving.
When the situation described in the reported clause was already in the past when it was spoken about 
originally, we often use the past perfect to report it:
 ‘We have found the missing girl.’ → Police said that they had found the missing girl.
However, if it is clear that one event took place before another, then it may not be necessary to 
indicate this by using the past perfect and we use the past simple instead:
 ‘I’ve sent out the invitations. I did it well before the wedding.’ → She reassured me that she 
sent out the invitations well before the wedding. (or… had sent …)
70
35
Reminder ➜ G1– G7
Unit
71
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 8 (page 245)
35. 1  Report these sentences using the verbs from the box in the reporting clauses and either the 
past simple or past perfect (or both if possible) in the that-clause. A
alleged        conceded         denied         estimated        recalled repeated
1 ‘I have never been in love with Oliver.’ →  
 She denied that she had ever been / was ever in love with Oliver.
2 ‘Markus has stolen jewellery from my house.’ → She 
  .
3 ‘I think the vase is around 250 years old.’ → She 
  .
4 ‘I’ve told you once. I’ve already seen the ﬁ lm.’ → She 
  .
5 ‘Well, perhaps you’re right. Maybe I did treat Lara unkindly.’ → She 
  .
6  ‘I seem to remember that Wilma’s great-grandmother was from Spain.’ → She 
  .
35.2  Complete the sentences with a verb chosen from a suitable pair. If both verbs in the pair are 
possible, write both. B
has / had             is / was             looks / looked             solved / have solved        
states / stated             understand / understood
1  Engineers hope that they  the problems with the bridge now that new 
supports have been built, and they plan to reopen it next week.
2  The current law  that an employee has the right to appeal against dismissal.
3  Simon is already a good tennis player, but he accepts that he still  a lot to 
learn.
4  I  that you want to buy a second-hand car. Your brother just told me.
5  Health ofﬁ cials warn that anyone who  directly at the sun during an eclipse 
may put their sight at risk.
6  They reassured us that the path  perfectly safe.
35.3  Jamie Barnes and Daniel Nokes have been interviewed by the police in connection with a 
robbery last week. If necessary, correct the tenses in the that-clauses in these extracts from 
the interview reports. If not, write ✓. Suggest possible alternatives. A–C
1  2
35
When I mentioned to Nokes that he had 
been seen in a local shop last Monday, 
he protested that he is at home all day. 
He swears that he didn’t own a blue 
Ford Focus. He claimed that he had 
been to the paint factory two weeks ago 
to look for work. Nokes alleges that he 
is a good friend of Jamie Barnes. He 
insisted that he didn’t telephone Barnes 
last Monday morning. When I pointed 
out to Nokes that a large quantity of 
paint had been found in his house, he 
replied that he is storing it for a friend.
At the beginning of the interview I 
reminded Barnes that he is entitled to 
have a lawyer present. He denied that 
he knew anyone by the name of Daniel 
Nokes. Barnes confi  rmed that he is in 
the area of the paint factory last Monday, 
but said that he is visiting his mother. He 
admitted that he is walking along New 
Street at around ten. He maintains that 
he was a very honest person and would 
never be involved in anything illegal.
Unit
A
B
C
D
E
After the verbs insist, order, say and suggest we use a that-clause but not a to-inﬁ nitive clause:
 There were cheers when he suggested that we went home early. (not … suggested to go …)
Advise and order can be used with an object + to-inﬁ nitive clause (see A) or a that-clause:
 I advised that she should accept. (or I advised her to accept.; but not I advised to accept …)
Verb + to-inﬁ nitive clause (not verb + that-clause)
After some verbs we use a to-inﬁ nitive clause but not a that-clause:
 Carolyn intends to return to Dublin after a year in Canada. 
(not Carolyn intends that she should return …)
When we report a suggestion, either what the person reported might do themselves, or what someone 
else might do, we can use a reporting clause with advise, propose, recommend or suggest followed 
by an -ing clause rather than a that-clause:
 The lecturer recommended reading a number of books before the exam. (or … 
recommended that the students should read a number of books before the exam.)
Verb + that-clause or verb + to-inﬁ nitive clause
After some verbs we can use a that-clause instead of a to-inﬁ nitive clause:
 He promised to arrive on time. or 
 He promised that he would arrive on time.
Verb + (object) + to-inﬁ nitive clause 
When we report offers, suggestions, orders, intentions, promises, requests, etc. we can follow some 
verbs in the reporting clause (see Unit 33) with – 
 a to-inﬁ nitive clause
 ‘The theatre will be built next to the town hall.’ → They propose to build the theatre next to 
the town hall. (not They propose them to build …) 
Also: agree, demand, guarantee, offer, promise, swear, threaten, volunteer
 an object + to-inﬁ nitive clause
 ‘You should take the job, Fran.’ → She encouraged Fran to take the job. 
Also: advise, ask, call on, command, instruct, invite, order, 
persuade, recommend, remind, request, urge, warn, tell
The object usually refers to the person who the offer, suggestion, etc. is made to; that is, the person 
who performs the action in the reported clause. 
Compare the use of ask with and without an object before a to-inﬁ nitive clause:
 We asked to leave our bags outside the exam room. (= this is something we wanted) and
 They asked us to leave our bags outside the exam room. (= this is something they wanted)
72
Reporting offers, suggestions, orders, intentions, etc.
36
Also: agree, demand, expect, guarantee, 
hope, propose, request, vow 
Also: long, offer, refuse, 
volunteer, want
With a that-clause the person promising, etc. and the person referred to in the reported clause may 
be different:
 He promised that he wouldn’t be late. (‘He …’ and ‘… he …’ may refer to different people)
Unit
73
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 8 (page 245)
36. 1  Report each sentence using a verb from the box and a to-inﬁ nitive clause. Use each verb once 
only. If necessary, add an appropriate object after the verb. A
 advise         agree        ask        call on        expect        hope        order        urge        vow
1 ‘If I were you, I’d read the exam questions very carefully.’ →  
He advised us to read the exam questions very carefully.
2 ‘Okay, I’ll collect Declan from school.’ → He …
3 ‘Be quiet!’ → He …
4 ‘Please stay for a few more days.’ → He … 
5 ‘I will ﬁ ght the ban on smoking in public places.’ → He …
6 ‘I imagine I’ll see Olivia at the party.’ → He … 
7 ‘Can you lend me ten pounds?’ → He …
8 ‘The government should do more to help the homeless.’ → He …
9 ‘If I leave early, I’ll avoid the heavy trafﬁ c.’ → He … 
36.2  Replace any incorrect verbs with ones from the boxes. (It may not be necessary to use all the 
boxed verbs.) B, C & D
expected        promised        refused        said
36
hoped        ordered        proposed        volunteered
36.3  Complete the sentences in any appropriate way using a clause beginning with the -ing form of 
a verb. E
1 To avoid the road works, police have advised leaving the motorway at Junction 3  .
2 To encourage people to use public transport the council proposed 
 .
3 Ricardo said the play was very entertaining and he recommended 
 .
4 To ﬁ nd my way around London, Reza suggested 
 .
5 I’d been feeling unwell for a few days and my mother advised 
 .
6 The capital urgently needs a new airport, and the government proposes 
 .
7 I’ve been putting on weight and my doctor has recommended 
 .
8 It was a lovely morning and Nina suggested 
 .
 Can any of these sentences be rewritten with a to-inﬁ nitive clause without an object?
The President of Guwandi has (5) demanded Narian troops to 
withdraw from the border area between the two countries, and said 
that he (6) wanted that the Narian president would act now to prevent 
war. In a separate development, the UN Secretary General has (7) 
agreed to meet the leaders of both countries and has (8) offered that a 
peace conference should be held in New York early next week.
In a major speech today, the Health Minister 
(1) suggested to improve the country’s health 
care. She (2) guaranteed to reduce waiting 
times for operations, and (3) intended that 
this could be done without raising taxes. She 
said that she (4) insisted to see signiﬁ cant 
improvements within a year. 
Unit
A
B
C
D
E
F
Modal verbs in reporting
 ‘She may have already left.’ → He thought she might have already left. 4
If the situation we are reporting still exists or is still in the future and the verb in the reporting clause 
has a present tense, we use will, can, and may in the reported clause (see Unit 32). Compare: 
 ‘Careful! You ’ll fall through the ice!’ → I warned him he would fall through the ice. 5  and 
 ‘I ’ll be in Paris at Christmas.’ → She tells me she’ll be in Paris at Christmas. 6
If the situation we are reporting still exists or is still in the future and the verb in the reporting clause 
has a past tense, we can use either would or will, can or could, or may or might in the reported 
clause:
 ‘The problem can be solved.’ → They said the problem can / could be solved. 7
 ‘I shall (I’ll) call you on Monday.’ → She told me she would call me on Monday. 8
 ‘Where shall I put this box?’ → He asked where he should put the box. 9
 ‘You must be home by 9 o’clock.’ → She said I must / had to be home by 9 o’clock. 10 
(had to is more natural in speech)
 ‘I didn’t hear the phone. I must be going deaf.’ → Alex thought he must be going deaf. 11
 ‘You mustn’t tell my brother.’ → He warned me that I mustn’t tell his brother. 12
Note that we sometimes use a modal verb in a reported sentence when there is no modal verb in the 
original:
 ‘You’re not allowed to smoke here.’ → She told me that I mustn’t smoke there.
 ‘My advice is to look for a new job now.’ → She said that I should look for a new job now.
 ‘I could meet you at the airport.’ → He said that he could meet us at the airport. 1
 ‘We might drop in if we have time.’ → They said they might drop in if they have time. 2
 ‘You should have contacted me earlier.’ → She said I should have contacted her earlier. 3
When there is a modal verb in the original statement, suggestion, etc., it sometimes changes when we 
report what was said or thought. The changes are summarised here:
modal verb in original modal verb in report
B could, would, should, might, 
needn’t, ought to, used to, 
could have, should have, etc.
could, would, should, might,
needn’t, ought to, used to,  (i.e. no change) 1  – 3
could have, should have, etc.
C will, can, may  would, could, might 4  & 5
 will, can, may (existing or future situations and 
present tense verb in reporting clause) 6
 will or would, can or could, may or might 
(existing or future situations and past tense verb in 
reporting clause) 7
D shall  would (talking about the future) 8
 should (offers, requests for advice, etc.) 9
E must (= necessity)
must (= conclude; see Unit 18B)
mustn’t
must or had to 10
must 11
mustn’t 12
74
37
Unit
75
Exercises
37 . 1 Underline the more appropriate verb. If both are possible, underline them both. C
1 The doctor says that he will / would see you in 20 minutes.
2 In her letter, Elizabeth revealed that she may / might be getting married soon.
3 Maxim tells me that he can / could come for dinner with us tonight after all.
4 Inge promised that she will / would be at home by nine, so I phoned her shortly after that.
5 The mechanic admitted that he can’t / couldn’t repair the radiator and had to replace it instead.
6 Olivia reckons that she can / could save enough money to go on holiday to Canada.
7 Mario explained that he will / would be living in Austria for the next six months.
37 .2  Complete the reported sentences using a that-clause with a modal verb. A & C
1 ‘If all goes to plan, I’ll study medicine.’ → He hoped that he would study medicine but  
instead he became a vet.
2 ‘I won’t be late.’ → She promised  and she kept her word.
3 ‘Perhaps we can go to Paris for the weekend.’ → He suggested  
 but I was busy.
4 ‘I can get you there in good time.’ → She guaranteed  
 but I didn’t believe her.
5 ‘I’ll pay for the meal.’ → He insisted  and I accepted, of course.
37 .3  Complete this message left on an answering machine by reporting what Chloe said, using 
modal verbs in the reports. D & E
37
37 .4  Complete the reported sentences using appropriate modal verbs. Give alternative modal verbs 
where possible. F
1 ‘It’s vital that you attend the meeting.’ → 
She said that I had to / must attend the meeting.
2 ‘If you want to travel with us, that’s ﬁ ne.’ → She said that 
 .
3 ‘I’m not prepared to answer his questions.’ → She said that 
 .
4 ‘Karl’s likely to be back soon.’ → She said that
 .
5 ‘There’s a possibility that I’ll have to move to Milan.’ → She said that 
 .
6 ‘I refuse to accept that Jason is dishonest.’ → She said that
 .
7 ‘Maria is sure to be disappointed if you leave without seeing her.’ → She said that …
 .
‘I can’t come to the phone at the moment. 
Please leave a message after the tone.’
‘Hi, Mia. I’ve just spoken to Chloe and she’s keen to come 
to the pool with us tomorrow. She apologised for not 
turning up last week – she said she was always forgetting 
things and that she (1) must be getting old!  
But she promised (2)  . 
She’s meeting Jack for lunch, and she said she 
(3) , so I suggested meeting 
at 10:30. She (4)  and I said 
just by the pool entrance. Hope that’s okay for you. 
Oh, and she said I (5)  . 
Remember yours, too. See you there. Bye.’
‘I must be in the city 
centre by one.’
‘Where shall we meet?’
 ‘I must be getting old.’ 
‘I shall be there this time.’
‘You mustn’t forget to bring 
your student discount card.’
Unit
A
C
B
Reporting what people say using nouns 
and adjectives
Reporting using adjectives
Some adjectives used to report a speaker’s feelings or opinion are followed by a that-clause:
 The builders are certain that they’ll be ﬁ nished by the end of next week. 
Also: adamant, agreed, angry, annoyed, grateful, insistent, sure
Adjectives expressing uncertainty are usually followed by a wh-clause:
 Scientists are n’t sure where the remains of the satellite will land. 
Also: doubtful (usually + whether), uncertain, not certain, unsure
Some adjectives are usually followed by a preposition + noun phrase:
 Today’s newspapers are very critical of the President’s decision to appoint Mr Walters. 
Also: apologetic, complimentary, insulting, tactful (+ about); 
dismissive, scornful (+ of); abusive, sympathetic (+ to / towards)
After many of the nouns listed in A we can use as to + wh-clause or as to + wh-word + to-inﬁ nitive 
to introduce the subject of a question or topic discussed or thought about (see also Unit 34F). Note 
that an alternative preposition can usually be used instead of as to:
 She asked my advice as to what subject she should study at university. (or … advice on …)
 There was some discussion as to whether the price included tax or not. (or … discussion of …)
 Before we left we gave them strict instructions as to how to cook it. (or … about how to …)
Reporting using nouns
We sometimes report people’s words and thoughts using a noun in the reporting clause followed by a 
reported clause beginning with that, a to-inﬁ nitive-, or wh-word. Most of these nouns are related to 
reporting verbs (acknowledgement – acknowledge, statement – state, etc.). Note that when we report 
using nouns and adjectives (see C) the exact original words are not necessarily reported. Instead we 
might use our own words, or report that something was said without reporting what was said.
 Noun +  that-clause
 The claim is often made that smoking causes heart disease.
 The jury came to the conclusion that the woman was guilty. 
Also: acknowledgement, advice, allegation, announcement, answer, argument, 
comment, decision, explanation, forecast, guarantee, indication, observation, promise, 
recommendation, reply, speculation, statement, suggestion, threat, warning
Note that we don’t usually leave out that in sentences like this (see Unit 33). 
 Noun +  to-inﬁ nitive clause
 I accepted Luisa’s invitation to visit her in Rome.
 He gave me every encouragement to take up painting again. 
Also: decision, instruction, order, promise, recommendation, refusal, threat, warning
Note that some of these nouns can be followed by a that-clause:
 They carried out their threat to dismiss workers on strike. (or … their threat that they would 
dismiss workers on strike.)
 Noun +  wh-clause
 Juan raised the question of when the money would be collected. 
 Our previous meeting looked at the issue of how to increase income. 
We usually use of after these nouns in reporting.
76
38
Also: explanation, 
discussion, problem
Unit
77
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 8 (page 245)
38. 1  Complete the sentences with the nouns from the box and the notes in brackets. Use a that-, 
to-inﬁ nitive or wh-clause. Suggest alternatives where possible. A
announcement         decision         encouragement        explanation        
invitation        issue        observation        promise        question        warning
1 The turning point in his life came when he took the
decision to become an actor. / … that  he would become an actor   ( become – actor)
2 He failed to address the … ( who – pay – repairs – building)
3 I was delighted to get an … ( spend the holidays – them – Scotland)
4 I think it was Aristotle who made the … ( no such thing – bad publicity)
5 Amazingly the police accepted Rudi’s … ( taken – wallet – mistake)
6 On the webinar they debated the … ( assisted suicide – criminal offence)
7 The letter from the company gave a ﬁ nal … ( pay – bill by – end of – week)
8 The government has broken its … ( reduce – rate – income tax)
9 The positive reaction to my work gave me considerable … ( take up photography – career)
 10 Waiting passengers were angry when they heard the … ( ﬂ ight  – cancelled)
38.2  Complete the rewritten sentences using a noun formed from the italicised verb + as to and 
then a wh-word. B
1 At the end the writers suggest when it is appropriate to correct students’ grammar mistakes. 
 The writers end with 
suggestions as to when it is appropriate to correct students’ grammar mistakes.   
2 People have argued a great deal about how to deﬁ ne poverty.
 There has been …
3 For months people have speculated about whether President Malik would stand again. 
 There have been months …
4 Scientists might conclude something about what their results imply. 
 Scientists might …
5 We have still not explained deﬁ nitely why the dinosaurs disappeared. 
 There is still …
38.3  Complete each sentence using an adjective from the box with that, a wh-word, or a 
preposition. C
abusive             adamant             agreed             angry             apologetic        
not certain             complimentary             dismissive              doubtful              unsure
1 The climbers were doubtful whether  the clothes would be warm enough at high altitudes.
2 My boss is very unsympathetic and was  my complaints about the new 
software.
3 The company is  the child car seats are safe.
4 Mona tried to pick up the rabbit, but was  to hold it.
5 She was very  the window had been broken.
6 Rachel is normally very reliable and was extremely  turning up late.
7 Karim left for New York in September but he was  he would return.
8 The court heard that Hughes became  a police ofﬁ cer and was arrested.
9 Judi doesn’t normally like spicy food, but was quite  my ﬁ sh curry.
 10 All the players are  the game should go on despite the weather.
38
Unit
A
B
C
D
E
F
Should in that-clauses; the present subjunctive
We can also use that-clauses with should or the subjunctive after reporting clauses with nouns 
related to the verbs in B (e.g. advice, order, proposal, warning):
 The police issued an order that all weapons (should) be handed in immediately. 
 The weather forecast gave a warning that people (should) prepare for heavy snow.
We can also use should or sometimes the subjunctive in a that-clause after it + be + adjective: 
 It is inappropriate that he (should) receive the award again. (or ... that he receives ...)
Also: advisable, appalling, appropriate, (in)conceivable, crucial, essential, 
imperative, important, obligatory, (un)necessary, urgent, vital
We can use should in a that-clause when we talk about our own reaction to something we are 
reporting, particularly after be + adjective. Compare:
 I am concerned that she should think I stole the money (or … that she thinks …)
Also: amazed, amused, anxious, astounded, disappointed, shocked, surprised, upset
Note that when we leave out should in sentences like this (= less formal) we use an ordinary tense, 
not a subjunctive. 
We can use should in a that-clause to talk about a situation that exists now:
 It’s not surprising that they should be seen together – they’re brothers.
or one that may exist in the future:
 We believe it is important that she should take the exam next year.
If we are talking about an intention or plan, we can often use a subjunctive rather than should:
 I’ve arranged that she come to the ﬁ rst part of the meeting. (or … that she should come … / 
… that she comes … / … for her to come …)
In formal contexts, particularly in written English, we can often leave out should and use only the 
base form of the verb (that is, the form you would look up in a dictionary). This form is the present 
subjunctive (see Unit 85A for the past subjunctive) and is used to describe bringing about the situation 
expressed in the that-clause:
 They have proposed that Felix 
move to their Munich ofﬁ ce.
 They directed that the building 
be pulled down.
We can sometimes report advice, orders, requests, suggestions, etc. about things that need to be done 
or are desirable using a that-clause with should + bare inﬁ nitive:
 They have proposed that Felix should move to their Munich ofﬁ ce.
 We advised that the company should not raise its prices.
After should we often use be + past participle (passive) or be + adjective:
 They directed that the building should be pulled down.
 We insist that the money should be available to all students in ﬁ nancial difﬁ culties.
78
39
Other verbs used with the present subjunctive: 
advise, ask, beg, command, demand, insist, 
instruct, intend, order, prefer, recommend, 
request, require, stipulate, suggest, urge, warn
To make a negative form, we use not (not ‘do not’) before the verb:
 We advised that the company not raise its prices. 
In less formal contexts we can use ordinary forms of the verb instead of the subjunctive. Compare:
 I suggested that he should give up golf. (negative: ... that he shouldn’t give up ...)
 I suggested that he give up golf. (more formal) (negative: ... that he not give up ...) 
 I suggested that he gives up golf. (less formal) (negative: ... that he doesn’t give up ...)
Unit
79
Exercises
39. 1  Report these statements from a Spanit Engineering Company board meeting. Use a that-clause 
with should (should + bare inﬁ nitive or should + be + past participle). A–C
1 Lee said: ‘I think it’s important to expand business in South America.’ 
Lee felt that business in South America should be expanded.
2 Lee said: ‘Mara Bianchi would make an excellent export manager. Let’s promote her.’ 
Lee urged  .
3 Alice said: ‘It would be valuable for us to send a sales representative to South Africa.’ 
Alice recommended  . 
4 Alice said: ‘The Delaware Bridge project ought to be completed by August next year.’ 
Alice reported  . 
5 Simon said: ‘It is vital to keep to our work schedules.’ 
Simon insisted  . 
6 Simon said: ‘I’d like all monthly reports sent to me directly.’ 
Simon instructed   . 
7 Alina said: ‘Perhaps we could use web conferencing for meetings to save money on air fares.’ 
Alina suggested  .
8 Alina said: ‘Our head ofﬁ ce must remain in London.’ 
Alina declared  .
9 Nathan said: ‘It’s okay for us to sponsor the European chess league for the next three years.’ 
Nathan agreed  .
 10 Nathan said: ‘In future, all claims for travel expenses are to be made in US dollars.’ 
Nathan announced  .
39.2  Look again at your answers for 39. 1. Can any of the sentences be written without should and 
still be correct? Write ‘yes’ if it is possible and ‘no’ if not. A–C
1   Lee felt that business in South America be expanded . No  
39.3  Expand the notes using a that-clause with should and an adjective from the box to make 
reporting sentences. More than one adjective may be possible, but use each once only. D & E
amused        appalling        astounded        imperative         
 inconceivable         shocked        upset        urgent
1 It is … / she / marry Ben. 
It is inconceivable that she should marry Ben.
2 I am … / Kristina / behave so badly.
3 I am … / anyone / vote for him.
4 It is … / he / return home immediately.
5 I am … / he / take his appearance so seriously.
6 I am … / they / think I had cheated them.
7 It is … / they / allowed to go free.
8 It is … / we / act now to avoid war.
39
Unit
A
B
C
D
Agreement between subject and verb 1
Some nouns with a singular form, referring to groups of some kind, can be used with either a singular 
or plural form of the verb. These nouns are sometimes called collective nouns:
 The council has (or have) postponed a decision on the new road.
We use a singular verb if the focus is on the institution or organisation as a whole unit, and a plural 
verb if the focus is on a collection of individuals. Often you can use either with very little difference in 
meaning, although in formal contexts (such as academic writing) it is common to use a singular verb.
Also: army, association, audience, class, club, college, commission, committee, community, 
company, crew, crowd, department, electorate, enemy, family, federation, generation, 
government, group, institute, jury, opposition, orchestra, population, press, public, school, team, 
university; the Bank of England, the BBC, IBM, Sony, the United Nations (speciﬁ c organisations)
In some contexts we have to use a singular or a plural form of the verb. 
 The committee usually raise their hands to 
vote ‘Yes’. (not The committee usually raises 
its hands ...)
This is something the individuals do, not the 
committee as a whole.
 The school is to close next year. (not The 
school are to close ...)
This is something that will happen to the 
school as a building or institution, not to the 
individuals in the school.
When names and titles ending in -s refer to a single unit we use a singular verb. Examples include 
countries; newspapers; titles of books, ﬁ lms, etc.; and quoted plural words or phrases:
 At this time of the year the Netherlands is one hour ahead of the UK.
 The Machine Gunners was one of Robert Westall’s most successful books.
 ‘ Daps’ is the word used in the south-west of the country for sports shoes.
If the subject is a clause, we usually use a singular verb:
 To keep these young people in prison is inhuman.
 Having overall responsibility for the course means that I have a lot of meetings.
 Whoever took them remains a mystery.
However, if we use a what-clause as subject (see Unit 98B), we use a singular verb if the following 
main noun is singular, and either a singular or a plural verb if the following main noun is plural 
(although a plural verb is preferred in more formal contexts):
 What worries us is the poor selection process.
 What is needed are additional resources. (or more colloquially … needed is …)
If a sentence has a singular subject, it is followed by a singular verb, and if it 
has a plural subject, it is followed by a plural verb; that is, the verb agrees 
with the subject. Compare:
 She lives in China.     and         More people live in Asia than in any other continent.
When the subject of the sentence is complex the following verb must agree with the main noun in the 
subject. In the examples below the subject is underlined and the main noun is circled. Note how the 
verb, in italics, agrees with the main noun:
 Many leading members of the opposition party have criticised the delay.
 The only excuse that he gave for his actions was that he was tired.
The verb must agree with the subject when the subject follows the verb (see Units 99 & 100):
 Displayed on the board were the exam results. (compare The exam results were displayed …)
80
40
Reminder ➜ H1– H3
Unit
81
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 9 (page 245)
40
40. 1  Correct ten mistakes in the italicised verbs in this museum review. A & B
40.2  Complete each sentence with a noun from the box and an appropriate form of the verb in 
brackets (singular, plural or both). C
audience        class        jury        orchestra        press        
 team         the United Nations        university 
1 The volleyball team  play / plays  twice a week in the summer. (play)
2 If the   to host the conference, I just don’t know where we will be able 
to hold it. (refuse)
3 The worldwide television  for tomorrow’s cup ﬁ nal  expected to be 
200 million. (be)
4 The   classical concerts throughout the year. (perform)
5 The Waterman’s Junior Book Prize   three adults and three children. 
(include)
6 The   all passed the end-of-year exam. (have)
7 The   a picture of chaos in our schools, but it’s just not like that at all. 
(present)
8   ordered an investigation into the capture of members of its peace-
keeping force in eastern Africa. (have)
40.3  If necessary, correct the mistakes in these sentences or write ✓ if they are already correct. 
A–D
1 The United States come top of the list of countries ranked by economic performance.
2 The people I know who have seen the ﬁ lm say that it’s really good.
3 The New Straits Times report that tourism is booming in Malaysia.
4 Northern Lights are one of Suzanne’s favourite books.
5 The stairs leading to the ﬁ rst ﬂ oor were steep and poorly lit.
6 Chequers is the country house of the British Prime Minister.
7 Whoever made all the mess in the kitchen have to clear it up.
8 The phrase ‘men in white coats’ are used to talk about psychiatrists.
9 The public needs to be kept informed about progress in the peace talks.
 10 Musical chairs are a party game where everyone dashes for a seat when the music stops.
The Rivers Museum on the corner of Corn Street and New Road 1 house  a 
fascinating collection of art and other objects which begins as soon as you 
step through the door. Among the most eye-catching pieces in the whole 
collection 2is the marble animal sculptures under two arches on the left 
of the entrance hall. Whoever created these ﬁ gures apparently 3remain a 
mystery, but the skill of the craftspeople who worked on them 4is obvious. 
Hanging on the wall directly opposite the carvings 5is over a hundred 
swords from the 17th century. The narrow doorway between the arches 
6let you into a series of smaller rooms where paintings from the 18th and 
19th centuries 7are on display. If paintings aren’t your thing, the museum’s 
incredible collection of seashells and fossils in the ﬁ nal room 8are sure to 
be of interest. Perhaps what is most surprising about the building itself 9are 
the bell tower in the small courtyard. Only since the restoration work was 
completed in 2011 10have the tower been open, and climbing the 150 
steps to the top to take in the view over the city 11is well worth the effort. 
Over 50 full-time staff and volunteers 12is employed and having so many 
of them available to answer questions about the collection 13add to the 
pleasure of this must-see museum. 
Museums and 
historic sites
The Rivers Museum
Open: 9 am – 5 pm,
Mon – Sat
Entrance: Free
houses
Unit
A
B
C
D
Agreement between subject and verb 2
When a subject is made up of two or more items joined by (either) … or … or (neither) … nor … we 
use a singular verb if the last item is singular (although a plural verb is sometimes used in informal 
English), and a plural verb if the last item is plural:
 Either the station or the cinema is a good place to meet. (or … are … in informal English)
 The President or his representatives are to attend the meeting.
If the last item is singular and previous item plural, we can use a singular or plural verb:
 Either the teachers or the principal is to blame for the accident. (or … are to blame …)
In there + be / have (see Unit 95) we use a singular verb form with singular and uncountable nouns 
and a plural form with plural nouns. However, in informal speech we often use a shortened singular 
form of be or have (= There’s) with plural nouns:
 Over the last few years there have been many improvements in car safety.
 There’s been lots of good ﬁ lms on lately. (or There’ve been …)
When a subject has two or more items joined by and, we usually use a plural verb:
 Ingrid and Tobias are moving back to Australia.
However, phrases connected by and can also be followed by singular verbs if we think of them as 
making up a single item:
 The lorry, its cargo and passengers weighs around 35 tonnes. (or … weigh …)
With any of, each of, either of, neither of, or 
none of and a plural noun / pronoun we can 
use a singular or plural verb. (We use a singular 
verb for careful written English.) 
 I don’t think any of them knows (or know) 
where the money is hidden.
 Neither of the French athletes has (or have) 
won this year.
With a / the majority of, a number of, a lot 
of, plenty of, all (of), or some (of) and a plural 
noun / pronoun we use a plural verb. (We use a 
singular verb with the number of.)
 A number of refugees have been turned 
back at the border.
 The number of books in the library has 
risen to over ﬁ ve million.
After one of and a plural noun / pronoun we 
use a singular verb. However, after one of + 
plural noun / pronoun + who we can often use 
either a singular or plural verb. (A plural verb is 
more grammatical.)
 One of the reasons I took the job was that I 
could work from home.
 He’s one of those teachers who insist / 
insists on pupils sitting silently in class.
With any of, none of, the majority of, a 
lot of, plenty of, all (of), some (of) and an 
uncountable noun we use a singular verb.
 All the furniture was destroyed in the ﬁ re.
 None of the equipment appears to be 
damaged.
With every or each and a singular noun or 
coordinated noun (x and y) we use a singular 
verb. (For each of, see above.)
 Every room looks over the harbour.
 Every boy and girl takes part in the activity.
 Each child has drawn a picture. but
 The children have each drawn a picture.
With everyone, everybody, everything (and 
similar words beginning any-, some- and no-) 
we use a singular verb.
 Practically everyone thinks that Phil should 
be given the job.
82
41
Unit
83
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 9 (page 245)
41
41. 1  Complete each set of sentences using nouns or phrases from (i) and appropriate present simple 
verb forms (active or passive) from (ii). If singular and plural verb forms are possible, write 
both. A
(i)
 his early paintings         my children         Dr Jones’s acquaintances        the food
(ii)
 remain         remember         taste        know
1 a I’d be surprised if any of my children remember / remembers  my birthday.
 b  It’s unlikely that any of  . It seems that he destroyed 
most of the work he produced during the 1930s.
 c  I don’t think any of  particularly good. In fact, the 
restaurant is rather disappointing.
 d  An investigation is underway to discover whether any of  
where he is.
(i)
 vegetarians        victims        other museums        medicines
(ii)
 exceed        charge        expect        relieve
2 a  Mainly because of recent health scares involving beef and chicken, the number of 
 to rise dramatically in the next ﬁ ve years.
 b A number of  the symptoms of inﬂ uenza, but none can cure it.
 c  It is estimated that the number of  of the ﬂ ooding 
 100,000.
 d  You can still go into the National Museum for free, although a number of 
 in the capital  people for entry.
(i)
 player        these factors        the cars        the pieces
(ii)
 last        test        inﬂ uence        try
3 a  The whole concert includes twenty short items from young musicians. Each of 
 about ﬁ ve minutes.
 b  The aim of the game is quite simple. Each  to buy as many 
properties on the board as possible.
 c Each of  for safety, fuel economy and reliability.
 d  There are four major inﬂ  uences on exchange rates: price levels, tariffs, preference for imported 
goods, and productivity. Here we investigate how each of  the 
exchange rate.
41.2  Complete the sentences with present simple forms of the verb in brackets. If both singular and 
plural verb forms are possible, write both. A–D
1 Plenty of jobs  available, but no one  them because they’re so poorly 
paid. (be / want)
2 The majority of those questioned  that the government’s economic policies have 
failed, although neither the Prime Minister nor the Education Minister  indicated 
that these policies will change. (think / have)
3 It’s the ﬁ rst time that either of us  been to China, but everyone we’ve met here 
 been very welcoming and helpful. (have / have)
4 Professor Smith and Dr Peters  that the wreck of the ship and its cargo 
 a danger to local people ﬁ shing near the island. (claim / constitute)
5 A: Oh, good, sausages and chips  my favourite.   
B: Sorry, all the sausages  gone, but there  plenty of chips left if you 
want some. (be / have / be)
Unit
A
B
C
D
Agreement between subject and verb 3
Uncountable nouns ending in -s
Some uncountable nouns always end in -s 
and look as if they are plural, but when we use 
them as the subject they have a singular verb:
 The news from the Middle East seems 
very encouraging. 
However, compare:
academic subject general use
 Politics is popular at this university.  Her politics are bordering on the fascist. 
(= political belief)
 Statistics was always my worst subject.  Statistics are able to prove anything you 
want them to. (= numerical information)
 Economics has only recently been 
recognised as a scientiﬁ c study.
 The economics behind their policies are 
unreasonable. (= the ﬁ nancial system)
Agrement with measurements, percentages, etc.
With a phrase referring to a measurement, amount or quantity we usually prefer a singular verb:
 Only three metres separates the runners in ﬁ rst and second places. (rather than … separate …)
and a singular verb must be used when the complement is a singular noun phrase (e.g. a long time):
 Three hours seems a long time to take on the homework. (not Three hours seem …)
When the ﬁ rst noun in a complex subject is a percentage or a fraction the verb agrees with the noun 
closest to the verb. Compare:
 An inﬂ ation rate of only 2% makes a difference to exports. (verb agrees with main noun) and
 About 50% / half of the houses need major repairs. (verb agrees with closest noun)
Where we use a singular noun that can be thought of as either a whole unit or a collection of 
individuals, we can use either a singular or plural verb:
 Some 80% of the electorate is expected to vote. (or … are expected …)
Plural nouns used with singular verbs
Although the words data and media (= newspaper, television, etc.) are plural (singular datum 
and medium), they are commonly used with a singular verb. However, in formal contexts such 
as academic writing a plural verb is preferred. Note that other similar plurals such as criteria and 
phenomena (singular criterion and phenomenon) are always used with plural verbs. Compare:
 All the data is available for public inspection. (or … are available …) and
 I agree that the criteria are not of equal importance. (not … the criteria is not …)
Plural nouns
Some nouns are usually plural and take a 
plural verb:
 The company’s earnings have 
increased for the last ﬁ ve years. 
84
42
Also: belongings, clothes, congratulations, goods, 
outskirts, overheads, particulars 
(= information), premises (= building), riches, savings, 
stairs, surroundings, thanks
Also: means (= ‘method’ or ‘money’); economics, 
linguistics, mathematics, phonetics, physics; 
politics, statistics; athletics, gymnastics; 
diabetes, measles, rabies
Note that whereabouts can be used with either a singular or plural verb, police and people always 
take a plural verb, and staff usually does:
 Police believe that Thomas is in Brazil, although his exact whereabouts are / is unknown. 
 Staff say that the new computer system has led to greater levels of stress in their work.
Unit
85
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 9 (page 245)
42
42. 1  If necessary, correct the italicised verbs. A & B
1 Dr Darsee’s present whereabouts is unknown. 
2 Phenomena such as sun spots have puzzled scientists for centuries.
3 Over the last decade the company’s overheads has increased dramatically.
4 The research data was collected during the period 12th–29th July 2012.
5 Congratulations goes to Ricky Branch for his excellent exam results.
6 The coastal surroundings of the village is particularly attractive.
7 He feels that the media have criticised him unfairly.
8 Further particulars about the house is available from the owner.
9 People says the house is haunted.
42.2  Complete the sentences using suitable present simple verbs. C
1 Modern linguistics  often said to have begun at the start of the 20th century.
2 I think the Senator’s politics  extremely right-wing. 
3 If athletics  neglected in schools, this will have a big impact on future national teams.
4 Measles  killed a large number of children in the Nagola region.
5 Contact us by whatever means  most convenient for you: phone, email or fax.
6 Recent statistics  evidence of a rapid increase in living standards in Asia.
42.3  Complete these extracts from news articles with a singular or plural form of the verbs in 
brackets. If both singular and plural forms are possible, write both.  A–D; also Unit 40
1
The outskirts of our cities  (have) benefi ted from the new out-of-town 
shopping centres that  (have) recently been built. Around a third of the 
population regularly  (shop) out of town. 
2
On average, 25 litres of water  (be) used each day per household and as the 
population  (expectKLJKHUOLYLQJVWDQGDUGVWKLV¿JXUHZLOOULVH
3
 Some 30% of the ofﬁ ce space in London  (be) presently empty and the 
Department for Employment  (blame) high property prices.
4
Three centimetres  (be) all that separated the ﬁ  rst two runners in last night’s 
10,000 metres and the sports club  (have) declared the race a dead-heat.
5
 Th e research group now  (admit) that the criteria they used  (be) 
not totally reliable, and that the fi gure of 85%  (be) exaggerated.
6
Following last week’s major art theft from the Arcon Art Gallery, the premises 
 ( be) searched by police last night and the owner’s belongings 
 (have) been taken away for further inspection.
7
 A survey of the opinions of students  (show) that economics  
(be) the least popular university subject. However, 90% of the economics students surveyed 
 (believe) that their courses are well taught.
8
Suff erers from diabetes  ( have) welcomed the launch by Federex of a new drug to 
combat the disease. Th e company  (say) that earnings from the drug  (be) 
to be put back into further research.
Unit
A
B
C
D
Compound nouns and noun phrases
Some compound nouns are made up of verbs and prepositions or adverbs, and may be related to a 
two- or three-word verb (see Unit 94). Compare:
 Mansen broke out of the prison by dressing as a woman. (= escaped) and
 There was a major break-out from the prison last night. (= prisoners escaped)
Countable compound nouns like this have a plural form ending in -s:
 read-out(s)       push-up(s)       intake(s)       outcome(s)
However, there are exceptions. For example:
 looker(s)-on (or onlooker[s])       runner(s)-up       passer(s)-by       hanger(s)-on
We can form other kinds of hyphenated phrases that are placed before nouns to say more precisely 
what the noun refers to:
 a state-of-the-art (= very modern) tablet PC       up-to-date information
Sometimes a noun + noun is not appropriate and instead we use noun + -’s + noun (possessive form) 
or noun + preposition + noun. In general, we prefer noun + -’s + noun –
 when the ﬁ  rst noun is the user (a person or animal) of the item in the second noun:
 a baby’s bedroom       a lion’s den       a women’s clinic       a girls’ school       birds’ nests
 when the item in the second noun is produced by the thing (often an animal) in the ﬁ rst:
goat’s cheese  duck’s eggs  cow’s milk (but note lamb chops and chicken drumsticks)
 when we talk about parts of people or animals; but we usually use noun + noun to talk about parts of 
things. Compare:
 a woman’s face       a boy’s arm       but       a pen top       a computer keyboard
We prefer noun + preposition + noun –
 when we talk about some kind of container together with its contents. Compare:
 a cup of tea (= a cup with tea in it)       and       a tea cup (= a cup for drinking tea from)
 when the combination of nouns does not refer to a well-known class of items. Compare:
 income tax (a recognised class of tax)       and       a tax on children’s clothes (rather than ‘a 
children’s clothes tax’)
In a compound consisting of noun + noun, often the second noun gives 
the general class of things to which the compound belongs and the ﬁ rst 
noun indicates the type within this class. The ﬁ rst noun usually has a 
singular form:
 an address book (= a book for addresses; not an addresses book)
However, there are a number of exceptions. These include –
 when the ﬁ  rst noun only has a plural form:
 a savings account       a customs ofﬁ cer       a clothes shop (compare a shoe shop)
 the arms trade  (arms = weapons)       a glasses case (glasses = spectacles. Compare ‘a glass 
case’ = a case made of glass)       an arts festival (arts = music, drama, ﬁ lm, dance, painting, 
etc. Compare ‘an art festival’; art = painting, drawing and sculpture)
 when we refer to an institution (an industry, department, etc.), such as
 the building materials industry       the publications department
which deals with more than one kind of item or activity (different types of building material, 
different forms of publication).
Note that to make a compound noun plural we usually make the second noun plural:
 coal mine(s)       ofﬁ ce-worker(s)       tea leaf / leaves
86
43
Reminder ➜ H4– H12
Unit
87
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 9 (page 245)
43
43. 1  If necessary, correct the italicised words. A & B
1 Ali worked for a long time in (a) the parks department, but a few years ago he retrained, and now 
he’s (b) a computers programmer. Of course, what he really wants to be is (c) a ﬁ lms star!
2 I was waiting at (a) the bus stop this morning when a cyclist on her way to the (b) girl school up 
the road got knocked off her bike. Someone got out of a car without looking and (c) the car’s 
door hit her. She was very lucky not to be badly hurt, although she did have (d) a head cut.
3 I shouldn’t be long at (a) the corner shop. I’ve just got three things on my (b) shopping list – (c) a 
milk bottle, (d) a biscuit packet, and (e) some teethpaste. I’ll also look for (f) some goat’s cheese, 
but I don’t think they’ll have any.
4 The tracks on his latest CD range from (a) love songs to (b) pollution songs.
5 Marta hated going into her grandfather’s old (a) tools shed. It was full of (b) spider webs.
6 When Jake was cleaning his (a) armschair, he found a lot of things that had slipped down the 
back. There was an old (b) pen top, a piece from (c) the 500-pieces jigsaw puzzle that his daughter 
had been doing, and his (d) glass case with his sunglasses inside.
43.2  Underline the two-word verbs in sentences 1–4, then complete sentences 5–8 with the 
corresponding compound nouns. C
1 Nathan tried to cover up the fact that he had gambled and lost most of his money.
2 It is reported that cholera has broken out in the refugee camp.
3 I’m ﬂ ying to Sydney, but I’m stopping over in Singapore for a few days on the way.
4 On the ﬁ rst Friday of each month, a few of us get together and go ten-pin bowling.
5 The minister was taken ill in Iceland during a short  on his way back to Canada.
6 We didn’t have a big party for Jo’s 50th birthday, just a family  .
7 Allegations of a  of a major leak of radioactive waste from the nuclear power plant 
have been strongly denied by the Energy Ministry.
8 Only two years ago there was a serious  of malaria in the town.
43.3  Match the halves of these phrases, then use them to complete the sentences below. 
The meaning of the correct phrase is given in brackets. D  
 day-to-        down-to-        larger-than-        man / woman-in-the-        
once-in-a-        step-by-        middle-of-the-        round-the
clock          day         earth        life        lifetime        road        step        street
1 Although the Managing Director of Transcom was involved in major decisions, she left the 
day-to-day  running of the company to her staff. (routine)
2 The party will never regain power unless it can persuade  
voters that it has rid itself of corruption. (not politically extreme)
3 Since the attempt to assassinate him last year, the Defence Minister has been given 
 protection by the police. (all day and all night)
4 The bookcase came with simple,  instructions on how to 
assemble it. (progressing from one stage to the next)
5 When the comet passes close to Earth next week, scientists will have a 
 opportunity to study its effects on our atmosphere. (very rare)
6 Eleni has a refreshing,  approach to management. She’s much 
less concerned with theory than with getting things done in the most efﬁ cient way possible. 
(practical)
7 The  isn’t interested in the ﬁ ner points of the government’s tax 
policy. They just want to know if they are going to take home more or less pay. (ordinary person)
8 Her father was a  character who was well known throughout 
the village for his eccentric way of dressing and outspoken views. (more exaggerated than usual)
Unit
A
B
C
A / an and one
Before a singular countable noun one and a / an both refer to one thing:
 We’ll be in Australia for one year. (or … a year.)
 Wait here for one minute, and I’ll be with you. (or … a minute …)
Using one gives a little more emphasis to the length of time, quantity, amount, etc.:
 He weighs one hundred and twenty kilos! Would you believe it! (using one emphasises the 
weight more than using a)
However, we use one rather than a / an if we want to emphasise that we are talking about only one 
thing or person rather than two or more:
 Do you want one sandwich or two?
 Are you staying only one night?
 I just took one look at her and she started crying.
We use one, not a / an, in the pattern one … other / another:
 Close one eye, and then the other.
 Bees carry pollen from one plant to another.
We also use one in phrases such as one day, one evening, 
one spring, etc. to mean a particular, but unspeciﬁ ed, day, 
evening, spring, etc.:
 Hope to see you again one day.
 One evening, while he was working late at the ofﬁ ce …
We use a / an (not one) to talk about a particular but unspeciﬁ ed person, thing or event:
 I really need a cup of coffee.
 You never see a police ofﬁ cer in this part of town, do you?
We also use a / an, not one, in number and quantity expressions such as:
 three times a year       half an hour       a quarter of an hour       a day or so (= ‘about a day’)
 50 cents a (= each) litre (note we can also say ‘50 cents for one litre’) 
 a  week or two (= between one and two weeks; note we can also say ‘one or two weeks’)
 a  few       a little       a huge number of …
We use a rather than one in the pattern a … of … with possessives, as in:
 She’s a colleague of mine.
 That’ s a friend of Gabriel’s.
We use a before nouns and noun phrases that begin with a consonant sound. 
If the noun or noun phrase starts with a vowel letter but begins with a 
consonant sound, we also use a:
a university (/ə ju:n …/)       a European (/ə jʊər …/)       a one-parent family (/ə wʌn …/)
We use an before words that begin with a vowel sound, including a silent letter ‘h’:
 an orange  an Italian  an umbrella  an hour  an honour
and abbreviations said as individual letters that begin with A, E, F, H, I, L, M, N, O, R, S or X:
 an MP (/ən em piː/)       an FBI agent (/ən ef biː aɪ …/)       an IOU (/ən aɪ əʊ juː /)
But compare abbreviations said as words:
 a NATO general (/ə neɪtəʊ … /) a FIFA ofﬁ cial (/ə fiːfə … /)  but  an OPEC meeting (/ən 
əʊpek … /) 
Note that we say:
 a history (book)  but  an (or a) historical (novel)
88
44
Reminder ➜ I6– 7

Unit
89
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 10 (page 246)
44. 1  Write a or an in the spaces. A
1  unpaid bill 8  U-turn
2  DIY shop 9  heirloom
3  MP3 player 10  NASA space launch
4  Euro 11  UN decision
5  MiG ﬁ ghter plane 12  SOS message
6  Olympic medal 13  F grade
7  AGM 14  hero
44.2  If necessary, correct a / an or one in these sentences, or write ✓. In which sentences are a / an 
and one both possible? B & C
1 I usually go to the gym four times one week.
2 There’s more than one way to solve the problem.
3 I phoned the council to complain, but just got passed on from a person to another.
4 The rate of pay is really good here. You can earn over £20 one hour.
5 Maybe we could go skiing one winter.
6 The apples are 90 cents one kilo.
7 Are you hungry? Would you like one piece of cake?
8 The rules say that there is only one vote per member.
9 You can get seven hours of recording on one disc.
 10 A: What would Moritz like for his birthday?   
B: Why don’t you ask Leah? She’s one good friend of his and will have some ideas.
 11 There’s one pen on the ﬂ  oor. Is it yours?
 12 The library books are due back in one month.
 13 Do you want some of my chips? There are too many here for a person.
 14 I’m going to London for one day or two.
 15 Either I’ll work late tonight or I’ll come in early tomorrow, but the report’s got to be ﬁ  nished by 
lunchtime a way or another.
 16 It will take more than one morning to ﬁ  nish the decorating.
44.3  Which is more appropriate, a / an or one? If both a / an and one are possible, write them both. 
B & C
1 If you wait  second I’ll get my coat and come too.
2 I want to see the river  last time before I leave.
3 The President is visiting the city  day in November.
4 It was announced that the plane would be approximately  hour late.
5 I could hear the sound of  helicopter in the distance.
6 I’d just like to say  thing before I go.
7 Misaki’s baby is  year old already.
8 Dinner should be ready in  hour or so.
9 Hugo came over  evening last week.
 10 I’ve painted  wall already and I’ll do the other tomorrow.
 11 I’d like to make  point here, Carlos, if I may.
 12  large number of people had gathered in the square.
44
Unit
A
B
C
A / an, the and zero article 1
Some nouns can be used uncountably when we talk about the whole substance or idea, but countably 
when we talk about an instance or more than one instance of it. When these nouns are used countably 
we can use a / an (and plurals). Compare:
 I don’t drink coffee. and  Would you like a coffee? (= a cup of coffee)
 He shook with fear. and  He has a fear of heights.
There are many other nouns like this, including conversation, grammar, importance, iron, pleasure, 
shampoo, sound. Some of these nouns (e.g. grammar, iron) have different meanings when they are 
used countably and uncountably.
We can use the when we make generalisations about classes of things using singular countable nouns. 
(See also Unit 47A.) Compare the use of the and a / an in these sentences:
 The computer has revolutionised publishing. (this refers to computers in general) but not 
A computer has revolutionised publishing. (computers in general have done this, not an 
individual computer)
 The computer is an important research tool. and 
 A computer is an important research tool. (this statement is true of both the general class 
and the individual item)
As an alternative to the + singular countable noun we can use a plural countable noun to talk about 
a class of things:
 Computers are an important research tool.
Note that if the is used with plural and uncountable nouns we refer to a speciﬁ c thing or group:
 The computers have arrived. Where shall I put them?
 The music was wonderful. I could have listened to the orchestra all night.
When we deﬁ ne something or say what is typical of a particular class of people or things, we generally 
use a / an rather than the:
 A corkscrew is a gadget for getting corks out of bottles.
 A garden is there to give you pleasure, not to be a constant worry.
We usually use the when we talk about – 
 things which are unique; that is, there is only one of them (or one set of them):
 the world       the sky       the atmosphere       the sun       the ground       
the climate       the horizon       the human race       the environment       
the travel industry       the Internet
 general geographical areas with the as in:
 the beach       the town       the sea(side)       the land       the country(side) 
(where ‘the country’ or ‘the countryside’ means ‘the area where there are no towns’)
  the past       the present       the future
Note, however, that some nouns like this can be used with zero article (i.e. no article) to refer to a 
concept in general:
 Climate is one of the many factors involved in changing farming methods. (or The climate …)
 These ﬂ  owers grow best in sandy soil and sun. (= sunshine)
 In autumn the temperature difference between land and sea decreases. (or … the land and 
the sea …)
If we want to describe a particular instance of these we can use a / an. Compare:
 I could see the plane high up in the sky. and
 When I woke up there was a bright blue sky. 
 What are your plans for the future? and
 She dreamt of a future where she could spend more time painting.
45
Reminder ➜ I1– I9
90
Unit
91
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 10 (page 246)
45. 1  Complete both sentences in each pair using one word from the box. Add the or a / an in an 
appropriate place. A
beach        future        past        world
1 a I think the best Australian wine is as good as any in  .
 b  As a child, Dariya would often daydream about travelling forward in time to  
very different from the one she lived in.
2 a  If we are elected, we will build our policies on the simple belief that our purpose is to create 
bright  for our children rather than achieving short-term goals for ourselves.
 b  Although our current ﬁ  nancial position is worrying, we have many new orders for our products 
and  is looking very positive.
3 a As I get older, I remember  better than things that happened recently.
 b Many tourists come to the village looking for  that never really existed. 
4 a  If you want to get away from it all, you can take a small boat to deserted  on one 
of the islands.
 b  Dear Mum and Dad, We’re having a great holiday. The weather’s wonderful and we’re 
spending most of our time on  .
45.2  Underline the correct or more likely answer. If both answers are possible, underline them both. 
B
1 We get some strange requests in our shop. We had the customer / a customer in the other day 
who wanted to buy chocolate-covered ants.
2 It often seems that the individual / an individual can have little impact on government policy.
3 The invention of a car / the car is normally attributed to the German engineer Gottlieb Daimler.
4 The television / A television has changed the way we think more than any other modern 
invention.
5 The campaign against smoking in public places argues that its harmful effects are not conﬁ ned 
to the smoker / a smoker.
45.3  Complete the sentences using the nouns from the box. Use each noun twice. If necessary, insert 
a / an in the correct place. C
conversation        grammar        iron        pleasure        sound
1 My sisters were clearly having  
a
  serious conversation  so I didn’t like to disturb them.
2 It now gives me great  to introduce that marvellous ventriloquist, Marco Lutman.
3 As we walked through the rainforest we heard  we weren’t expecting – the ring of a 
mobile phone.
4 The failure to teach  in schools has affected people’s ability to write well.
5 Most red meat is relatively high in  .
6  travels at different speeds, depending on the temperature of the air.
7 It’s real  to travel by rail in Sweden. The trains are clean and punctual.
8 I have  of English printed in 1890 on very thin paper.
9 Although he’s got  he never seems to use it. His shirts are always creased.
 10 As she walked into the party,  ceased and everyone in the crowded room stared at 
her.
45

Unit
A
B
C
D
E
A / an, the and zero article 2
Note that a / an, or sometimes zero article, is used with a name when referring to the particular 
excellent qualities of the person named:
 Majid plays tennis well, but he’ll never be (a) Roger Federer.
We also use a / an when we refer to an individual example of a product made by a particular 
manufacturer (e.g I’ve just bought a Mercedes) or a work by a particular artist (e.g. Do you think it 
could be a Van Gogh / a Rembrandt?).
You can use a / an before a person’s name if you don’t know the person yourself. Compare:
 Dr Lee is here for you. (= I know Dr Lee) and
 There’s a Dr Amy Lee on the phone. (= I haven’t heard of her before) Do you want to talk to her?
In stories and jokes in conversation, this is commonly used instead of a / an to introduce a new 
person or thing. Using this highlights the person or thing as the topic of what is to come next:
 As I was walking along, this spider (= a spider) landed on my head, and …
 This man (= a man) goes into a chemist and he says …
We use the before a superlative adjective (the biggest, the most expensive, etc.) when the 
superlative adjective is followed by a noun or deﬁ ning phrase:
 He is the ﬁ nest young player around at the moment.
However, we can often leave out the, particularly in an informal style, when there is no noun or 
deﬁ ning phrase after the superlative adjective. Compare:
 A: Why did you decide to stay in this hotel?
 B: It was ( the) cheapest. and It was the cheapest I could ﬁ nd.
We usually use zero article (i.e. no article) before the name of an individual person or place. However, 
we use the –
 when there are two people with the same name to specify which one we mean:
 That’s not the Stephen Fraser I went to school with.
but compare ‘There was a Stephen Fraser in my class.’ (= a person named Stephen Fraser)
 when we want to emphasise that the person we are referring to is the most famous person with that 
name. Used this way, the is stressed and pronounced /ðiː/:
 Do they mean the Neil Armstrong, or someone else?
 with an adjective to describe a person, or another noun which tells us their job:
 the late Michael Jackson
 (the) artist Joseph Turner (‘the’ is sometimes left out, particularly in journalism)
 when we talk about a family as a whole:
 The Robinsons are away this weekend.
We use a / an to say what a person’s job is, was, or will be: 
 She was a company director when she retired.
 Against her parents’ wishes, she wants to be a journalist.
However, when we give a person’s job title, or their unique position, we use the or zero article 
(i.e. no article), not a / an. Compare:
 She’s been appointed ( the) head of the company. and
 I’m a production manager at Fino. (= there may be more than one production manager)
After the position of, the post of, or the role of we use zero article before a job title:
 Dr Simons has taken on the position of Head of Department.
92
46
Reminder ➜ I1– I9
Unit
93
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 10 (page 246)
46. 1  If necessary, correct any mistakes in these sentences. If they are already correct, write ✓. A–C
1  She was determined to be author one day.
2  She recently became the minister in the new government. 
3  A: What make is your computer?   B: It’s Mac. 
4  I found myself talking to George Clooney! Not George Clooney, of course, but someone with the 
same name. 
5  I didn’t even know Clara was interested in art until I heard that she owns Van Gogh. 
6  I’ve been offered the position of Director of Personnel. 
7  We’re going on holiday with Nielsens. 
8  He’s really keen on athletics. He likes to think of himself as the Usain Bolt. 
46.2  Put a / an, the or zero article (–) in the spaces. Give all possible answers. A–C
1  I’m  marketing adviser at Uniﬂ eet.
2  Leon’s  manager of his local football team.
3  She has been appointed  Minister for Industry.
4  A special award was given to  novelist Ian McMurphy.
5  Let me introduce you to  Georgia Rossi.
6  We met our good friend  Eliza Borg when we were in  Malta.
7  When Lucia was young she knew  Picasso.
8   Linda Green is outside. Do you want to see her?
46.3  If the italicised the can be left out of these sentences, put brackets around it. E
1. It’s the best ice-cream I’ve ever tasted.
2 Rodrigo’s boat wasn’t the most elegant in the harbour, but it was certainly the biggest.
3 I thought the second competitor was the best, even though he didn’t win a prize.
4 This is by far the most valuable painting in the collection.
5 A: Why did you ask Martina to go ﬁ rst?   B: Because she’s the oldest.
6 Sapphires occur in a variety of colours, but blue ones are the most valuable.
7 The Paciﬁ c is the biggest ocean in the world.
8 It’s supposed to be the oldest post ofﬁ ce in the country.
46.4  Complete the email with a / an, the, zero article or this. Give alternatives where possible.  
Units 45 & 46
46
Something very strange happened to me the other night. As I was going home 
(1)  man came up to me. He had (2)  untidy hair and (3)  paint 
all over his clothes. He told me that he was (4)  head of the local council and that 
he was offering me a job as (5)  road sweeper. He said that (6)  road 
sweeper earns a great deal of money and that I would become very rich in (7)  
future. Well, I just said ‘No, thanks’ and walked on. When I looked back he had stopped 
(8)  woman. He was telling her that he was (9)  President of the United 
States and that he wanted her to be (10)  Defence Secretary …
Unit
A
B
C
D
A / an, the and zero article 3
We use zero article with times of the day and night such as midnight, midday, and noon:
 If possible, I’d like it ﬁ  nished by midday.
 Midnight couldn’t come quickly enough. 
But note that we can say either the dawn or dawn:
 He got back into bed and waited for ( the) dawn.
We use the + morning / afternoon / evening for a day which is understood or already speciﬁ ed:
 I enjoyed the morning, but in the afternoon the course was boring. 
But compare:
 Morning is the time I work best. (= mornings in general; The morning … is also possible)
 I’ll be there by (the) morning / evening. (but … by the afternoon, not … by afternoon)
 I waited all morning. (more usual than all the morning / afternoon, etc.)
 ‘You look upset.’ ‘Yes, I’ve had a terrible morning.’ (= compared to other mornings)
We often use by + zero article to talk about means of transport and communication. Compare:
 I generally go by bus to work.     and  I generally take the bus to work.
Also: go / travel by car / taxi / bus / plane / train / air / 
sea; contact / communicate by post / email / phone
We often use zero article with the names of holidays, special times of the year, months, and days of 
the week including Easter, Ramadan, New Year’s Day. But compare:
 I’ll see you on Saturday. (= next Saturday)
 We met on Saturday. (= last Saturday)
 They came on a Saturday as far as I can remember. (we are only interested in the day of the 
week, not which particular Saturday)
 They came on the Saturday after our party. (a particular Saturday, specifying which one)
With winter, summer, spring, autumn, and New Year (meaning the holiday period), we can use 
either zero article or the:
 In ( the) summer I try to spend as much time as I can in the garden.
We use the when it is understood or we go on to specify which summer, spring, etc. we mean:
 I’d like to go skiing in the autumn. (= this year)
 I ﬁ  rst went skiing in the spring of 2002.
We say ‘in the New Year’ to mean near the beginning of next year:
 I’ll see you again in the New Year.
When we want to describe the features of a particular holiday, season, or other period of time and say 
that it was somehow special when compared with others, we can use It / That was … + a / an + noun 
+ modifying phrase. Compare:
 That was a winter I’ll never forget. (= compared to other winters it was unforgettable) and
 That was the winter we went to Norway. (= a statement about a particular winter)
With plural and uncountable nouns, zero article (i.e. no article) is used to 
talk generally, without deﬁ nite people or things in mind. The is used when we 
assume the listener or reader will understand who or what we are referring to, 
or when other words in the noun phrase make the reference speciﬁ c. Compare:
 The government has promised not to tax books. (= books generally) and
 The books have arrived. (= the books you ordered)
 Music played an important part in his life. (= music generally) and
 I thought the music used in the ﬁ lm was the best part. (= that particular music)
94
47
Reminder ➜ I1– I9
Unit
95
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 10 (page 246)
47 . 1 Complete both sentences in each pair using one word from the box. Add the where necessary. A
agriculture        children        ﬁ re        holidays        islands        money        parents        rain
1 a  as young as ten are working in the clothing industry.
 b While you’re painting the sitting room, I’ll take  over to the park.
2 a  As the soil quality deteriorated, so too did  on which the region 
depended. 
 b  Around 60% of the labour force in the county is supported by  .
3 a Around the world  are being threatened by rising sea levels.
 b  off the east coast of Malaysia are beautiful.
4 a I’ve been really busy at work, so I’m really looking forward to  .
 b  in the Brazilian rainforests are now becoming popular with travellers.
5 a Farmers will be hoping for  in the next few weeks. 
b  Last night  was torrential.
6 a I’ve left  I owe you on your desk.
 b It is said that  is the root of all evil.
7 a  will be able to use this software to check their child’s use of the Internet.
 b  of Paul Thomas claimed that he was at home at the time of the robbery.
8 a It isn’t known how  started.
 b Animals fear  more than anything else.
47 .2  Complete the dialogues with a / an, the or zero article (–), whichever is more likely. Where 
more than one answer is possible, consider any difference in meaning. B & C
1  A: What’s the matter?   
B: I’ve been working in the garden all  afternoon and my back aches.
2 A: Can you remember when we last saw Alex?   
B: It was  Sunday in June, I think.
3 A: When did you get your laptop?   
B: July 15th last year. I remember because it was also  day I passed my driving test.
4 A: I haven’t seen Subin for months.   B: He’s been away in South Africa for  winter.
5 A: I’ve spent  afternoon on the phone to my mother.   B: Why? Is there a problem?
6 A: Shall we go out walking on  Sunday?   B: No, I’m busy this weekend.
7 A: Do you remember when Mateo did all the cooking?   
B: Of course. It was  Christmas the rest of us had ﬂ u.
8 A: I’ll see you again after  Christmas.   B: Okay. Have a good holiday.
9 A: That old coat of yours won’t be warm enough for  winter.   
B: You’re right. I need a new one.
 10 A: Remember when Lars and Ella had that terrible row?   
B: How could I forget? That was  day I wouldn’t want to go through again.
47 .3  Complete the sentences using the words from the box (more than once). Add any other 
necessary words. D
air        car        email        post
1  A : I got  from Carla yesterday.   B: How is she now?
2  The train was cancelled so I had to come  . 
3  Research has found that living plants are efﬁ cient at absorbing pollutants in  .
4  The application forms came in  this morning. 
5 The exam results will be sent  on 24th August. 
6  It’s raining so I think I’ll take  .
7  A: Shall I send Goran a letter?   B: No, the quickest way to get in touch with him is  .
8  Thailand – Getting there : The main international airport in Thailand is 
Suvarnabhumi Airport …
47
Unit
A
B
E
C
D
Some and any
When we can’t say exactly which person or thing we are talking about because we don’t know, can’t 
remember, or want to emphasise that it is not important, we can use some instead of a / an with a 
singular noun. When it is used in this way, some is usually pronounced /sʌm/.
 He was interrupted twice by some troublemaker in the audience.
We use the phrase some (thing) or other in a similar way:
 I bought them from some shop or other in New Street. (not … from a shop or other …)
Any
We usually use any not some (and anyone, anything, etc. not someone, something, etc.) –
 in non-afﬁ  rmative contexts; that is, lacking positive, afﬁ rmative meaning.
 to refer to non-speciﬁ  c, unspeciﬁ ed things.
For example, we generally use any in sentences with a negative meaning: 
 There’s hardly any sugar left. 
 I closed the windows to prevent any ﬂ ies getting in.
 It was impossible to see anything in the dark.
 We got to the airport without any difﬁ culty.
Also when sentences include: barely, never, rarely, scarcely, seldom (= negative adverbs); deny, 
fail, forbid, prohibit, refuse (= negative verbs); reluctant, unable, unlikely (= negative adjectives)
However, we use some with these negative words–
 when some (pronounced /sʌm/) has the implication ‘not all’:
 I talk to colleagues before I make some decisions, but I had to make this one on my own. 
 when the basic meaning is positive:
 Somebody isn’t telling the truth. (= There is some person [who isn’t telling the truth])
 when we are talking about a particular but unspeciﬁ  ed person or thing:
 I was reluctant to repeat something so critical of Paul. (= a speciﬁ c criticism)
Some is used before a number to mean ‘approximately’:
 Some eighty per cent of all residents took part in the vote. (= approximately eighty per cent; 
beginning ‘Eighty per cent …’ suggests a more precise ﬁ gure)
When it is used in this way, some is usually pronounced /sʌm/.
We often use any in clauses that begin with before, and with comparisons:
 I cleared up the mess before anyone saw it. (‘… before someone saw it’ suggests that I have a 
particular person in mind who might see it)
 The material felt softer than anything she had ever touched before.
Some
Before plural and uncountable nouns we sometimes use some or zero article (i.e. no article) with very 
little difference in meaning:
 ‘Where were you last week?’ ‘I was visiting ( some) friends.’
 Before serving, pour ( some) yoghurt over the top.
With both some and zero article we are referring to particular people or things but in an indeﬁ nite 
way. When it is used in this way, some is usually pronounced /səm/.
We don’t use some to make general statements about whole classes of things or people:
 Machinery can be dangerous unless used properly. 
 Babies need a lot of attention.
96
48
Reminder ➜ I10–I21
Unit
97
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 10 (page 246)
48. 1  If necessary, correct these sentences by writing some in an appropriate place or crossing it out. 
If the sentence is already correct, write ✓. A & Reminder I10–I14
1 If you’re going to the library, could you take back books that I’ve ﬁ nished reading? 
2  The price of some coffee is at an all-time low. 
3  Tony knows more about some jazz than anyone I’ve ever met. 
4  The door kept ﬂ ying open in the wind so I tied it up with string. 
5  Sports are dangerous. 
6  I need to get some bread from the supermarket. 
7  Money can’t buy you some happiness. 
8  Children are taller than expected at a given age. 
48.2  Rewrite these news headlines as full sentences using some to mean ‘approximately’. B
48
48.3  Complete the sentences in any appropriate way using some + singular noun or some + 
singular noun + or other. C
1 I don’t know where I got the information from. I must have heard it 
on some radio programme (or other). 
2 I don’t know where Jakub is. He’s probably  .
3 I don’t know where the book is. Maybe I lent it  .
4 I don’t know where Zuzanna works. I think it’s in  .
5 I don’t know why Nika is still at work. Perhaps she’s got to  .
48.4  Complete these sentences with some, someone, something, any, anyone or anything. 
Where both some(one / thing) or any(one / thing) are possible, write both and consider any 
difference in meaning. D & E
1 Elias worked hard at learning Japanese but failed to make  real progress.
2 I was unable to eat  of the food.
3 I always offer to help organise school concerts, but there is seldom  for me to do.
4 Fiona Jones is  I rarely see these days.
5 He denied that he had done  wrong.
6 I always get to work before  else.
7 The theatre is unlikely to have  tickets left for tonight’s performance.
8 Despite rowing as hard as we could, we had gone barely  distance from the shore.
9  parents never seem to have time to sit down and talk to their children.
 10 When I last lent my laptop out it got damaged, so I’m reluctant to lend it to  else.
1
250 people charged with assault following Molton riots
Some 250 people have been charged with assault following the Molton riots.
2
30% OF ALL CITY BUSES FOUND TO BE UNSAFE
3
 Unexploded bomb found 5 miles from Newham centre
4
 25% OF ELECTRICITY FROM WIND BY 2025
5
200 jobs to be lost at Encon steelworks
Unit
A
B
C
D
E
F
No, none (of) and not any
In a formal or literary style we can use not a in initial position or after and, but or that (see also 
Unit 100):
 Not a sound came from the room. (less formally There wasn’t a sound from the room.)
 She kept so quiet that not a soul in the house knew she was there.
After no, we can often use either a singular or a plural noun with little difference in meaning, although 
a singular noun is usually more formal:
 No answers could be found. (or more formally No answer …)
 We want to go to the island but there are no boats to take us. (or more formally … there is 
no boat.)
However, we use a singular noun in situations where we would expect one of something, and a plural 
noun where we would expect more than one. Compare:
 I phoned Sarah at home, but there was no answer. (not … but there were no answers.) and
 He seems very lonely at school, and has no friends. (not … no friend.)
We can give special emphasis to no or none of using phrases like no amount of with uncountable 
nouns, not one … / not a single … with singular countable nouns, and not one of … with plural nouns:
 The company is so badly managed that no amount of investment will make it successful.
 Not one person remembered my birthday. (or Not a single person …)
 Not one of the families affected by the noise wants to move.
Some phrases with no are commonly used in informal spoken English: No wonder (= it’s not 
surprising); No idea (= I don’t know); No comment (= I have nothing to say); No way, No chance 
(= emphatic ways of saying ‘no’, particularly to express refusal to do or believe something); 
No problem, No bother (= it isn’t / wasn’t difﬁ cult to do something):
 ‘The computer’s not working again.’ 
‘No wonder. It’s not plugged in!’
 ‘Thanks for the lift.’ ‘ No problem. 
I had to go past the station anyway.’
We don’t usually use not a / any, not anyone, etc. in initial position in a  sentence or clause, or 
straight after and, but or that at the beginning of  a clause. Instead we use no, none of, no one, etc.:
 No force was needed to make them move. (not Not any force was needed …)
 Most players are under 16 and none of them is over 20. (not … and not any of them …)
 I’m sure that nothing can go wrong. (not … that not anything can …)
We can use no and none (of) instead of not a or not any for particular 
emphasis. Compare:
 There is n’t a train until tomorrow. and There’s no train until tomorrow. (more emphatic)
 Sorry, there is n’t any left. and Sorry, there’s none left.
 He did n’t have any of the usual symptoms. and He had none of the usual symptoms.
We use other pairs of negative words and phrases in a similar way:
 There is n’t anyone / anybody here. and There’s no one / nobody here. (more emphatic)
 She was n’t anywhere to be seen. and She was nowhere to be seen.
 Why do n’t you ever call me? and Why do you never call me?
98
49
Reminder ➜ I29–I34

Unit
99
Exercises
49. 1  Complete the sentences with a word or phrase from (i) followed by a word or phrase from (ii). 
Use each word or phrase once only. A–C
(i)
no         none         none of        no one        nothing        nowhere        never        not
(ii)
a drop        else        going to get        heard        the hotels        
 in the cupboard         point        wrong
1 Where are the biscuits? There are none in the cupboard.
2 We left the house as quietly as possible and  us.
3  was spilt as she poured the liquid into the ﬂ ask.
4 She was determined to leave and I knew there was  in protesting.
5 The door was locked and he had  to go.
6 I found that  in the city centre had any rooms left.
7 Liam’s so lazy. Is he  a job?
8 The doctors reassured Emily that they could ﬁ nd  with her.
49.2  Look again at the sentences in 49. 1. Which of them can you rewrite to make less emphatic using 
not (n’t) any / anyone, etc.? A & B
49.3  If necessary, correct the italicised parts of this email. D
49
49.4  Complete these sentences in any appropriate way beginning not one (of) or no amount of. E
1 I made lots of cakes for the party but not one of the children liked them.
2 Mr Carlson didn’t want to sell the painting, and … 
3 I sent job applications to over a hundred companies, but … 
4 Smallpox used to be common all over the world but since 1978 … 
5 The ﬂ oor had dirty black marks all over it, and … 
49.5  Choose one of the No … phrases from section F opposite to complete these dialogues. F
1 A: Can you give me a lift to the station?   B:  . I’ll pick you up at eight.
2 A: I’ve got a headache.   
B:  . You’ve been in front of that computer screen for hours.
3 A: Do you think Kim will pass her maths?   
B:  . She just doesn’t work hard enough.
4 A: Where’s Stefan?   
B:  . Last time I saw him he was in the kitchen.
5 A: I’m from News World, Dr James. Do you have anything to say about 
the accusation that you stole from your patients?   B:  . Goodbye.
+L-XVWEDFNIURPDZHHNRQWKHLVODQGRI/XPRV±EXW,FHUWDLQO\ZRXOGQ¶WUHFRPPHQGLW7KHLUHFRQRP\LVLQD
UHDOO\EDGZD\$ORWRISHRSOHMXVWVLWDURXQGDOOGD\±WKHUHis no jobWREHIRXQGRXWVLGHWKHPDLQWRZQ,KDG
WRKLUHDFDUEHFDXVHWKHUHis no train or busRQWKHLVODQG%XWLWZDVLQFUHGLEO\ROG±LW¶VDJHVVLQFH,¶YHVHHQD
car with (3) no seatbelt$QGWKHQZKHQ,KDGDSXQFWXUH,GLVFRYHUHGWKHUHwere no spare tyresHLWKHU,WZDVLQ
the hills in the north, and as there (5) were no peopleDURXQGWRKHOS,SKRQHGWKHFDUKLUHFRPSDQ\DQGKDGWRZDLW
KRXUVIRUVRPHRQHWRWXUQXS,WZDVKRWDQGWKHUHwas no shade as there (7) is no treeLQWKDWSDUWRIWKHLVODQG
7KHKRWHOZDVQ¶WPXFKEHWWHU7KHUHwere no swimming pools±HYHQWKRXJKLWVKRZHGRQHRQLWVZHEVLWH7KHUH
(9) were no televisionsLQP\URRPDQGRQWKH¿UVWQLJKWWKHUHwas no hot water%XWZKHQ,SKRQHGGRZQ
WRUHFHSWLRQWRFRPSODLQWKHUHwere no replies7KHIRRGZDVDZIXODWWKHKRWHOEXWDVWKHUHwere no 
restaurantsIRUPLOHVDURXQGWKHUHwere no choices±,KDGWRHDWWKHUH%XW,GRQ¶WWKLQN,¶OOEHJRLQJEDFN
6SHDNVRRQ
Karl
Unit
A
B
C
D
E
Much (of), many (of), a lot of, lots (of), etc.
To emphasise that we are talking about a large number we can use a good / great many with a plural 
noun:
 She has a good / great many friends in New Zealand.
To emphasise that we are talking about a large amount we can use a good / great deal of with a 
singular or uncountable noun:
 A good / great deal of the exhibition was devoted to her recent work.
We use far (not ‘much’ or ‘many’) before too many + a plural countable noun or too much + an 
uncountable noun:
 Far too many students failed the end-of-year maths exam. (not Much / Many too many …)
 Far too much time is wasted ﬁ lling in forms. (not Much / Many too much time …)
We often use plenty of instead of a lot of or lots of with uncountable and plural countable nouns. 
However, plenty of means ‘enough, or more than enough’ and is therefore not likely in certain 
contexts. Compare:
 We took lots of / plenty of food and drink on our walk through the hills. and
 Nina doesn’t look well. She’s lost a lot of weight. (‘plenty of’ is unlikely here)
We can use many following the, my, its, his, her, etc. and plural countable nouns:
 Among the many unknowns after the earthquake is the extent of damage to the foundations 
of buildings.
 The gallery is exhibiting some of his many famous paintings of ships.
We can use the phrase many a with a singular noun to talk about a repeated event or a large number 
of people or things:
 Many a pupil at the school will be pleased that Latin is no longer compulsory.
In afﬁ rmative sentences we generally use a lot of and lots (of) rather than 
much (of) and many (of), particularly in informal contexts. However, there 
are a number of exceptions –
 In formal contexts, such as academic writing, much (of) and many (of) are often preferred. We can 
also use phrases such as a large / considerable / substantial amount of (with uncountable nouns), or 
a large / considerable / great / substantial number of (with plural nouns):
 Much debate has been heard about Thornton’s new book. 
 There could be many explanations for this.
 Much of her ﬁ ction describes women in unhappy marriages.
 A large amount of the food was inedible. (or Much of …)
 The book contains a large number of pictures, many in colour. (or … many …)
 In formal contexts we can use much and many as pronouns:
 There is no guarantee she will recover. Much depends on how well she responds to treatment.
 Many (= many people) have argued that she is the ﬁ nest poet of our generation.
 Not once did I see a tiger in the jungle, although I heard many. (referring back to ‘tiger(s)’)
 We usually use many rather than a lot of or lots of with time expressions (days, minutes, months, 
weeks, years) and number + of (e.g. thousands of voters, millions of pounds):
 We used to spend many hours driving to Melbourne and back.
 He was the founder of a company now worth many millions of pounds.
100
50
Reminder ➜ I38–I42
Unit
101
Exercises
 50
50. 1  Make corrections or improvements to these extracts from conversations (1–3) and from 
academic writing (4–6). A, C, D & E
Lola’s had many problems with her 
back for a lot of years. She’s having 
an operation next week and she 
won’t be back at work for a good 
deal of weeks afterwards.
A: There’s bound to be much 
trafﬁ c on the way to the station. 
Perhaps we should leave now. 
B: No, there’s plenty time left, 
and at this time of day many 
people will already be at work.
Many think that hedgehogs are 
very rare nowadays, but when I 
was in Wales I saw many.
50.2  Complete the sentences with either  the / my / its / his / her many or many a / an and one 
item from the box. B
coffee shops        expeditions         German relatives         golf courses        
emails        ship        sunny afternoon        teacher
1 She went to stay in Munich with one of her many German relatives.
2 I spent  sitting on the terrace looking out over the hills.
3  has been lost in the dangerous waters off the south 
coast of the island.
4 The area is most famous for  that attract players from 
all over the world.
5 Since the end of last year he has refused to speak to me on the phone or answer 
 .
6 Oliver Svensson accompanied Colonel Colombo on  
to the Himalayas and the Andes.
7  will be looking forward to the start of the school 
holidays.
8 I went into the ﬁ rst of  along New Street and ordered an 
espresso.
50.3  If possible, complete these sentences using plenty of. If not, use a lot of. E
1 It will be very hot on the journey, so make sure you bring  drinking water.
2  staff at the hospital have come down with a mysterious illness.
3 He didn’t have   money, so he decided to catch the bus rather than take a taxi.
4 We were surprised when  students failed to attend the lecture.
5 I’m looking forward to a relaxing holiday, and I’m taking  books to read.
14
5
6
2
3
A lot have claimed that Professor Dowman’s 
study on current attitudes to politics is fl awed. 
One criticism is that much too many people 
questioned in the survey were under 18.
A lot of research has been conducted on the 
effects of diet on health, with a lot of studies 
focusing on the link between fat intake and 
heart disease. However, a lot remains to be done.
While it is true that a lot of thousands of jobs 
were lost with the decline of the northern 
coal and steel industries, a lot of advantages 
have also followed. Much too many cases of 
lung disease were recorded in the region, but 
with lower levels of pollution the number has 
declined. In addition, a great deal of hi-tech 
companies have moved in to take advantage of 
the newly available workforce.
Unit
A
B
C
D
All (of), whole, every, each
All and whole
Before singular countable nouns we usually use the whole rather than all the:
 They weren’t able to stay for the whole concert. (rather than … for all the concert.)
However, we can say all + day / week / night / month / winter, etc. (but not usually all October /  
2001 /  21st May, etc.; all Monday / Tuesday, etc. are only usually used in informal contexts); all the 
time, all the way; and in informal speech we can use all the with things that we see as being made up 
of parts (all the world / house / city / country / department, etc.):
 After the ﬁ  re the whole city was covered in dust. (or … all the city ... in informal speech)
Note that we can use entire instead of whole immediately before a noun:
 The whole / entire building has recently been renovated.
Before plural nouns we can use all (of) or whole, but they have different meanings. Compare:
 All (of) the towns had their electricity cut off. (= every town in an area) and
 After the storm, whole towns were left without electricity. (= some towns were completely 
affected; note that we don’t say ‘… whole the towns …’)
Every and each 
Often we can use every or each with little difference in meaning. However, we use every –
 with almost, virtually, etc. + noun to emphasise we are talking about a group as a whole:
 Almost every visitor stopped and stared. (not Almost each visitor …)
 with a plural noun when every is followed by a number:
 I go to the dentist every six months. (rather than … each six months.)
 with abstract uncountable nouns such as chance, conﬁ dence, hope, reason, and sympathy to show a 
positive attitude to what we are saying. Here every means ‘complete’ or ‘total’:
 She has every chance of success in her application for the job.
 in phrases referring to regular or repeated events such as: every other (kilometre), every single (day), 
every so often, every few (months), and every now and again (= occasionally).
We use each –
 before a noun or one to talk about both people or things in a pair:
 I only had two suitcases, but each one weighed over 20 kilos.
 as a pronoun:
 I asked many people and each gave the same answer. (or … each / every one gave …)
To make negative sentences with all (of) we usually use not all (of) rather than all … not (although 
all … not is sometimes used in informal spoken English):
 Not all (of) the seats were taken. or The seats were not all taken.
Note that not all (of) and none of have a different meaning. Compare:
 Not all (of) my cousins were at the wedding. (= some of them were there) and
 None of my cousins were at the wedding. (= not one of them was there)
All (of)
We sometimes use all after the noun it refers to:
 His songs all sound much the same to me. (or All [of] his songs sound …)
 We all think Kushi’s working too hard. (or All of us think …)
Note that we usually put all after the verb be and after the ﬁ rst auxiliary verb if there is one:
 They are all going to Athens during the vacation. (not They all are going …)
 You should all have three question papers. (not You all should have …; however, note that we 
can say ‘You all should have …’ for particular emphasis in spoken English)
102
51
Reminder ➜ I43–I46
Unit
103
Exercises
 51
51. 1  Put all in the more appropriate space in each sentence. A
1 They  were  sitting around the table waiting for me.
2 You  can  stay for dinner if you want.
3 It  had  happened so quickly, I couldn’t remember much about it.
4 We  are  going to be late if we don’t hurry.
5   the children  started to speak at once.
6 We have  been  involved in the decision.
51.2  Underline the more appropriate answer. If both are possible, underline them both. C
1 All the process / The whole process takes only a few minutes.
2 All areas of the country / Whole areas of the country have been devastated by the ﬂ oods, although 
others haven’t had rain for months.
3 All the trip / The whole trip cost me less than $1,000.
4 The new rail network links all of the towns / whole towns in the region.
5 When I picked up the book I found that all of the pages / whole pages had been ripped out. There 
wasn’t a single one left.
6 The new heating system makes all the building / the whole building warmer.
7 All the room / The whole room was full of books.
51.3  Complete these sentences with every or each, whichever is more appropriate. If you can use 
either every or each, write them both. D
1 I had  reason to believe that she would keep my secret.
2 The ten lucky winners will  receive £1,000.
3 We’ve discussed the problem in virtually  meeting for the last year.
4 Hugh sends us a postcard from  place he visits.
5 In a rugby league game  side has 13 players.
6 They had to take out  single part of the engine and clean it.
7 Antibiotics were given to  child in the school as a precaution.
8 The two girls walked in,  one carrying a bouquet of ﬂ owers.
9  household in the country is to be sent a booklet giving advice on ﬁ rst aid.
 10 You should take two tablets  four hours.
51.4  Find any mistakes in the italicised parts of this blog post and suggest corrections. A–D
(1) Each so often I like to invite (2) my entire family – my parents, six brothers and their 
families – over for dinner on Saturday evening. My parents are quite old now, so I like to see 
them (3) each few weeks. It’s quite a lot of work and I usually spend (4) all Friday shopping 
and cooking. Some of my family are fussy about what they eat, so I generally have to cook 
different things for (5) every of them. Fortunately, (6) all the food doesn’t usually get eaten, 
so I have plenty left for the rest of the week. (7) None of my brothers always come, but the 
ones who live locally usually do. Last Saturday (8) Neil and his family all were on holiday so 
they couldn’t make it. Anyway, (9) the rest of us had all a great time and we spent 
(10) the whole evening talking about when we were children.
Unit
A
B
C
D
Few, little, less, fewer
In speech and informal writing, we use not many / much or only / just … a few / little to talk about 
a small amount or number, and we often use a bit (of) instead of a little:
 Sorry I haven’t ﬁ  nished, I haven’t had much time today. (rather than … I had little time …)
 I won’t be long. I’ve only got a few things to get. (rather than … I’ve got few things …)
 Want a bit of chocolate? (rather than … a little chocolate?)
In more formal contexts, such as academic writing, we generally prefer few and little:
 The results take little account of personal preference. (rather than … don’t take much …)
Less (than) and fewer (than) 
We use less with uncountable nouns and fewer with plural countable nouns:
 You should eat less pasta.
 There are fewer cars on the road today.
Less is sometimes used with a plural countable noun (e.g. … less cars …), particularly in 
conversation. However, this is grammatically incorrect.
We use less than with a noun phrase indicating an amount and fewer than with a noun phrase 
referring to a group of things or people:
 I used to earn less than a pound a week when I ﬁ rst started work. 
 There were fewer than 20 students at the lecture. (or informally … less than …; but note that 
some people think this use of ‘less than’ is incorrect)
When we talk about a distance or a sum of money we use less than, not fewer than:
 The beach is less than a mile away.
To emphasise that a number is surprisingly large we can use no less than or no fewer than:
 The team has had no fewer than ten managers in just ﬁ ve years. (or … no less than …)
Note that we prefer no less than with percentages, periods of time and quantities:
 Proﬁ  ts have increased by no less than 95% in the last year. (rather than … no fewer than …)
We can use the few and the little followed by a noun to suggest 
‘not enough’ when we talk about a group of things or people (with few) 
or part of a group or amount (with little):
 It’s one of the few shops in the city centre where you can buy food.
 We should use the little time we have available to discuss Jon’s proposal.
Instead of the few / little we can use what few / little to mean ‘the small (number / amount)’:
 She gave what little money she had in her purse to the man. (or … the little money …)
 What few visitors we have are always made welcome. (or The few visitors …)
Note that we can also say ‘She gave what / the little she had …’ and ‘What / The few we have …’ 
when it is clear from the context what is being referred to.
We can use few (but rarely little) after personal pronouns (my, her, etc.) and these and those:
 I learned to play golf during my few days off during the summer.
 These few miles of motorway have taken over ten years to build.
We often use (a) few and (a) little with nouns. However, we can also use 
them as pronouns:
 It is a part of the world visited by few. (= few people)
 Do you want a chocolate? There’s still a few left. (= a few chocolates)
 Little is known about the painter’s early life.
 ‘Do you know anything about car engines?’ ‘ A little.’ (= I know a little about car engines)
Note that quite a few means ‘quite a large number’:
 She’s been away from work for quite a few weeks.
104
52
Reminder ➜ I47–I52
4
2
3 
Unit
105
Exercises
 52
52. 1  Complete the sentences with (a) few, (a) little, the few, the little, what few or what little, 
giving alternatives where possible. A & B
1 Thomas was named sportsperson of the year, and  would disagree.
2  remains of the old castle walls except the Black Gate.
3 She called her  remaining relatives together and told them she was leaving.
4 Simpson is among  foreign journalists allowed into the country.
5 A: Has my explanation helped?   B:  , yes.
6  belongings she had were packed into a small suitcase.
7 Maya hasn’t been looking well recently, and I’m  worried about her.
8 A: Have there been many applications for the job?   B: Yes, quite  .
9 The children weren’t well so I had to take  days off.
 10 I don’t have much money, but I’m happy to lend you  I have.
52.2  Suggest changes to the italicised text in these examples from conversations (1–4) and from 
academic writing (5–8). C
1 A:  B:
1 Proportion with part-time jobs (%)
 Fewer students had a part-time job in 2000 than now.
2 Proportion of money spent on books (%) 
3 Proportion who walk to lectures (%)
4 Time spent online per week (hours)
 Are there any results that surprise you? Comment on them using no less than or no fewer than.
Did you do anything last night?
 I just watched a little TV and then went to bed.
5 The country hasn’t had many female politicians since independence.
6 It is thought that the two leaders didn’t exchange many words on their ﬁ rst meeting.
7 Teachers were found to be a bit more conﬁ dent after the extra training.
8 There doesn’t seem to be much prospect of ever recovering the missing manuscript.
52.3  A survey of British university students was conducted in 2000 and recently repeated. Some of the 
results are given below. Comment on them in sentences using fewer (than) or less (than). D
Take some sweets if you want, although there are few left.
I’ve tried to help her, but there’s little more I can do.
See that old car over there? There’s few like that left now.
Proportion with part-time jobs (%)
27
55
Male
9
69
Female
18
62
Total
2000
Now
48
82
Male
58
8
Female
Proportion who walk to lectures (%)
70
28
Total
6
12
Male
10
24
Female
Time spent online per week (hours)
8
18
Total
2000
Now
Proportion of money spent on books (%)
20
10
Male
30
20
Female
25
15
Total
Unit
A
B
C
Relative pronouns
Relative pronouns are used to add information in non-deﬁ ning relative clauses 
as follows:
adding information about things adding information about people
subject which that subject who
object which that object who whom
 Note that we must include a relative pronoun in a non-deﬁ  ning relative clause.
 We can use who or whom as object, although whom is very formal:
 Professor Johnson, who(m) I have long admired, is to visit the university next week.
 When we add information about things, we can use which as subject or object. That is sometimes 
used instead of which, but some people think this is incorrect:
 The Master’s course, which I took in 2001, is no longer taught. (or … that I took …)
Relative pronouns are used to add information in deﬁ ning relative clauses as follows:
adding information about things
subject which that
object which that no relative pronoun
adding information about people
subject who that
object who that no relative pronoun whom
 When we add information about things, we can use that (or no relative pronoun) as object in 
conversation and which in more formal contexts:
 Decorating’s a job ( that) I hate. (rather than ‘… which …’ in this informal context)
 When we add information about people, we generally prefer that (or no relative pronoun) as object 
in informal contexts rather than who or whom:
 He’s the man ( that) I met at Aisha’s party (rather than … who / whom I met …)
 whom is very formal and rarely used in spoken English:
 The boy whom Elena had shouted at smiled. (less formally that, no relative pronoun or who)
 We use that as subject after: something and anything; words such as all, little, much, and none 
used as pronouns; and noun phrases that include superlatives. Which is also used as subject after 
something and anything, but less commonly:
 These walls are all that remain of the city. (not … which remain of the city.)
 Note that we can use that (or no relative pronoun) as object after something / anything; all, etc.; 
and noun phrases with superlatives. For example:
 She’s one of the kindest people (that) I know. (not … one of the kindest people who I know.)
Deﬁ ning and non-deﬁ ning relative clauses begin with a relative pronoun, 
which can sometimes be omitted:
 We went to a beach ( which / that) Ali had recommended to us.
Here the relative pronoun refers to ‘a beach’, and the subject of the relative clause is ‘Ali’. Compare:
 I know a man who / that ran in the New York Marathon last year.
where the relative pronoun refers to ‘a man’, and the subject of the relative clause is also ‘a man’. 
In this case, the relative pronoun can’t be omitted.
106
53
Reminder ➜ J1–J5
Unit
107
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 11 (page 247)
53
53. 1  Put brackets around the italicised relative pronoun if it can be omitted. A
1 We talked about the party which Natalia wants to organise for my birthday.
2 To get to Maxim’s house, take the main road that bypasses the village.
3 The paintings which Mr Flowers has in his house are worth around £100,000.
4 Let’s go through the main points that he made in his lecture.
5 He received a low mark for his essay, which was only one page long.
6 Mrs Yang, who is 42, has three children.
7 Dev is a friend who we stayed with in Australia.
8 In the shop window there’s a sign that says ‘10% off’.
9 The couple who live next to us have 16 grandchildren.
 10 There was little that we could do to help her.
53.2  Rewrite these sentences including the information in brackets as relative clauses (deﬁ ning or 
non-deﬁ ning). Give alternative relative pronouns if possible. (Use (–) to indicate ‘no relative 
pronoun’.) B & C
1 Oliver said something. (I couldn’t hear it clearly) Oliver said something that / which / 
– I couldn’t hear clearly.
2 Eva’s father has just come back from a skiing holiday. (he is over 80)
  .
3 The problems faced by the company are being resolved. (I’ll look at these in detail in a moment)
  .
4 She was greatly inﬂ uenced by her father. (she adored him) 
  .
5 He pointed to the stairs. (they led down to the cellar) 
  .
6 These drugs have been withdrawn from sale. (they are used to treat stomach ulcers) 
  .
7 The singer had to cancel her concert. (she was recovering from ﬂ u) 
  .
8 The minister talked about the plans for tax reform. (he will reveal them next month) 
  .
9 I have two older sisters. (I love them very much) 
  .
53.3  If necessary, correct or make improvements to these sentences. If they are already correct, 
write ✓. A–C
1 There’s something which I should tell you.
2 The doctor whom Ingrid went to see was very thorough.
3 Yesterday was the hottest day I can remember.
4 There isn’t much can go wrong with the machine.
5 Thieves whom stole paintings from Notford art gallery have been arrested in Paris.
6 It may be the most important decision which you will ever take.
7 The boy took the photograph was paid £100.
8 I heard many different accents in the room, but none which I could identify as Polish.
9 He just said anything which came into his head.
 10 There’s this dream which I have every night about falling downstairs.
Unit
A
B
C
Other relative words: whose, when, whereby, etc.
Clauses with who and what; whatever, whoever and whichever
Some clauses beginning with a wh-word are used like a noun phrase in a sentence. These are 
sometimes called nominal relative clauses:
 Can you give me a list of who’s been invited? (= the people who have been invited)
 I didn’t know what I should do next. (= the thing that I should do next)
Note that we can’t use what in this way after a noun:
 I managed to get all the books that you asked for. (not … all the books what you asked for.)
We use clauses beginning with whatever (= anything or it doesn’t matter what), whoever (= the 
person / group who or any person / group who), or whichever (= one thing or person from a limited 
number), to talk about things or people that are indeﬁ nite or unknown:
 I’m sure I’ll enjoy eating whatever you cook.
 Whoever wins will go on to play Barcelona in the ﬁ nal.
 Whichever one of you broke the window will have to pay for it.
Clauses with when, whereby, where and why
We can begin relative and other clauses with when (referring to time), whereby (method or means; 
used mainly in formal contexts), and where (location). In formal English in particular, a phrase with 
preposition + which can often be used instead of these:
 The camera records the time when the photo is taken. (or … the time at which …)
 Do you know the date when we have to hand in the essay? (or … the date on / by which …)
 We need to develop a system whereby workers and management can communicate more 
effectively. (or … the system in / by which workers …)
 This was the place where we ﬁ rst met. (or … the place at / in which we …)
In academic English, we can also use where to refer to features other than location, particularly after 
words such as case, condition, example, situation, system:
 Later in this chapter we will introduce cases where consumer complaints have resulted in 
changes in the law. (or more formally … cases in which …)
We can also use a / the reason why or a / the reason that or just a / the reason:
 I didn’t get a pay rise, but this wasn’t the reason why I left. (or … the reason (that) I left.)
Clauses with whose
We use a relative clause beginning with the relative pronoun whose + noun, particularly in written 
English, when we talk about something belonging to or associated with a person, animal or plant:
 Stevenson is an architect whose designs have won international praise.
 Suzy was taking care of a dog whose ears were badly damaged in a ﬁ ght with a cat. 
We can use whose in both deﬁ ning and non-deﬁ ning relative clauses.
We generally avoid using whose to talk about something belonging to or associated with a thing:
 I received a letter, and its poor spelling made me think it was written by a child. ( more natural 
than I received a letter, whose poor spelling made me think …)
However, we sometimes use whose when we talk about towns, countries, or organisations:
 The ﬁ  lm was made in Botswana, whose wildlife parks are larger than those in Kenya.
 We need to learn from companies whose trading is healthier than our own.
In academic writing whose is used to talk about a wide variety of ‘belonging to’ relationships:
 Students have to solve problems whose solutions require a knowledge of calculus.
108
54
Reminder ➜ J1–J5
Unit
109
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 11 (page 247)
54. 1  Combine a sentence from (i) with a sentence from (ii) to make new sentences with whose. A
(i) (ii)
1 Dr Rowan has had to do all her own typing.
2 The newspaper is owned by the Mears 
group.
3 Parents are being asked to take part in the 
survey.
4 Children do better in examinations.
5 My aunt is now CEO of a department store.
6 I enjoy growing plants.
a  Its chairperson is Miss Jiu Kim.
b   Their diets contain high levels of protein.
c  Their ﬂ owers are attractive to bees.
d  Her secretary resigned two weeks ago. 
e   Her ﬁ rst job was ﬁ lling shelves in a 
supermarket.
f  Their children are between four and six.
1 + d Dr Rowan, whose secretary resigned two weeks ago, has had to do all her own 
typing.   
54.2  Deﬁ ne the words using whose (1–3) and in which (4–6). You may need to use a dictionary. 
A & B
1 A lexicographer is a person whose job is to write dictionaries.  
2 A widow is a woman  .
3 An actuary is a person 
  .
4 A furnace is a container  .
5 A gazebo is a small garden building  .
6 Polo is 
  .
54
54.3  Complete these sentences using phrases from the box and when, whereby, where or why. B
the area        an agreement        a condition        a method        the moment        the reason
1  Sunset is deﬁ ned in astronomy as  the whole of the sun’s disc 
disappears below the horizon.
2 In 1951, China and the Soviet Union signed  China provided 
uranium ore in exchange for technical assistance.
3  The coastline is  the land meets the sea or ocean. 
4 The river is prone to sudden ﬂ ooding which is  there are no major 
towns along its banks. 
5  Freeze-drying is  water is rapidly evaporated from frozen food in
 order to preserve it.
6  Hypoglycaemia is  the level of sugar in the blood drops suddenly.
54.4  If the italicised word is correct, write ✓. If not, suggest another word. C
1 I think whatever was responsible for damaging the trees should be ﬁ ned or sent to prison.
2 Do they really understand that they are doing?
3 I don’t envy whoever buys that house. It’s in a terrible condition.
4 Now that I no longer have to wear a school uniform, I’ll be able to wear which I want.
5 I think the government should improve the health service, whichever the cost.
6 It’s a question that I’ve been asking for many years.
7 The clock makes a noise what keeps me awake at night.
8 I’m sure that Rashid will do well at university, which one he goes to.

Unit
A
B
C
D
Prepositions in relative clauses
When a preposition is needed with the relative pronouns which and whom we usually put it before 
the relative pronoun in formal styles:
 The rate at which a material heats up depends on its chemical composition.
 There are 80 teachers in the Physics Department, among whom are 24 professors. 
After a preposition we usually use whom rather than who in formal styles:
 Is it right that politicians should make important decisions without consulting the public to 
whom they are accountable? (rather than … the public to who they are accountable.)
and we don’t use that or no relative pronoun:
 The valley in which the town lies is heavily polluted. (not The valley in that the town lies is 
heavily polluted.; not The valley in the town lies is heavily polluted.)
In less formal English we usually put the preposition later in the relative clause:
 The ofﬁ  ce that Juan took us to was ﬁ lled with books. (rather than The ofﬁ ce to which Juan 
took us …)
and we prefer who (or that) rather than whom (see also Unit 26A):
 The playground wasn’t used by the children who it was built for.
If the verb in the relative clause is a two-word verb (e.g. come across, ﬁ ll in, look after, take on) we 
don’t usually put the preposition before the relative pronoun:
 The Roman coins, which a local farmer came across in a ﬁ eld, are now on display in the 
National Museum. (not … coins, across which the local farmer came, are …)
With three-word verbs, we only put the preposition before the relative pronoun in a very formal or 
literary style, and many people avoid this pattern:
 She is one of the few people to whom I look up. (or less formally … who I look up to.)
In formal, mainly written, English whose can come after a preposition in a relative clause. Putting the 
preposition at the end of the clause is more natural in informal and spoken English: 
 I now turn to Freud, from whose work the following quotation is taken. (less formally … 
Freud, whose work the following quotation is taken from.)
In formal styles noun + of which is often preferred to –
 whose + noun:
 A huge amount of oil was spilled, the effects of which are still being felt. (or … whose effects 
are still being felt.)
 that / which … of in relative clauses:
 The school of which she is head is closing. (less formally The school (that / which) she is head 
of is closing.) 
After both we can use of which and of whose, but not usually which or whose:
 Lotta was able to switch between German and 
Russian, both of which she spoke ﬂ uently. 
(not … both which she spoke ﬂ uently.)
110
55
Reminder ➜ J1–J5
Also after: all, each, many, most, 
neither, none, part, some, a number 
(one, two, etc.; the ﬁ rst, the second, 
etc.; half, a third, etc.), and superlatives 
(the best, the biggest, etc.)
Unit
111
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 11 (page 247)
55. 1  Rewrite these sentences so that they are more appropriate for formal written English. Use 
preposition + which or preposition + whose, as appropriate. A & B
1 Fleming’s discovery of penicillin, which he was awarded the Nobel Prize for, had a major 
inﬂ uence on the lives of people in the 20th century. Fleming’s discovery of penicillin, for 
 which he was awarded the Nobel Prize, had a major influence on the lives of 
 people in the 20th century.
2 He was the uncle of Anne Boleyn, whose execution in 1536 he lost power after.
3 It is her unmarried name which she is better known by.
4 Mr Wang, whose land the road will be built across, is unhappy about the plans.
5 The election result, which there can be no doubt about, is a great disappointment.
6 The building which Marcus emerged from was little more than a ruin.
7 It is a medieval palace, whose tower the king hid in during the civil war.
8 I am grateful to Aarav Basu, whose book on the history of the bicycle this information comes 
from.
55.2  Complete the sentences using the endings from the box and which or whom after an 
appropriate preposition. C
the furniture is to be delivered.        she was divorced in 2005.        he had shown his novel.
 I had great respect.         it was named.        the printer was supplied.
most world trade was conducted.        you should be aware.
1 My Maths teacher, Mr Kato, was someone for whom I had great respect.
2 Until 1914 the pound sterling was the currency 
  .
3 They have changed the date 
  .
4 Pasteurisation was discovered by the French chemist Louis Pasteur, 
  .
5 He was persuaded to stay in England by Charles Dickens, 
  .
6 There are a number of safety procedures 
  .
7 Details are in the instruction manual 
  .
8 Ms Park was left the money by her former husband, 
  .
55.3  Rewrite the sentences from 55.2 in a less formal way, putting the preposition at the end of the 
relative clause. A
1 My Maths teacher, Mr Kato, was someone who / that / – I had great  respect for. 
55.4  If necessary, suggest corrections or improvements to these sentences or write ✓ if they are 
already correct. A, C & D
1 The house into which the thieves broke is owned by Caleb Cruz.
2 The school has been given 20 laptops, half of which are brand new.
3 JKL Motorbikes sells six different models, the ﬁ rst which they started making in 1985.
4 The party, to which I’ve been looking forward all week, is at Maxine’s house.
5 The water that she fell into was freezing cold.
6 I have heard her on the violin and clarinet, both which she plays extremely well.
7 The ﬁ lm was made at Tulloch Castle, part which dates back to 1466.
8 The college is home to 30 students from Nepal, almost all of who are studying economics.
55
Unit
A
B
C
D
E
Other ways of adding information to noun phrases 1: 
additional noun phrases, etc.
The adverb namely and the phrase that is are used to add details about a noun phrase:
 This side effect of the treatment, namely weight gain, is counteracted with other drugs.
 The main cause of global warming, that is the burning of fossil fuels, is to be the focus of 
negotiations at the international conference.
We can also add information to a noun phrase using a participle clause beginning with an -ing, -ed or 
being + -ed verb form. These are often similar to deﬁ ning relative clauses:
 The people living next door come from Italy. (or The people who are living next door …)
 The weapon used in the murder has now been found. (or The weapon that was used ...)
 The prisoners being released are all women. (or The prisoners who are being released …)
Note that -ing participle clauses correspond to deﬁ ning relative clauses with an active verb, while -ed 
and being + -ed clauses correspond to deﬁ ning relative clauses with a passive verb.
We can also use a to-inﬁ nitive clause, as in:
 Have you brought a book to read? 
 My decision to resign from the company was made after a great deal of thought.
 I thought that the management’s offer, to increase staff holidays, was a good one.
In written English, particularly in newspapers, -ing and -ed clauses are also used instead of non- 
deﬁ ning relative clauses. These are usually written between commas or dashes (–):
 The men, wearing anoraks and hats, made off in a stolen Volvo estate.
We can add information to a noun phrase with a conjunction such as and or or:
 Kurt Svensson, her teacher and well-known concert pianist, thinks that she has great talent. 
(= her teacher is also a well-known concert pianist)
 Phonetics or the study of speech sounds is a common component on courses in teaching 
English as a foreign language.
We sometimes add information about a person or thing referred to in one noun phrase by talking 
about the same person or thing in a different way in a following noun phrase:
 A hooded cobra, one of the world’s most dangerous snakes, has escaped from Dudley Zoo.
 Dr Alex Parr, director of the State Museum, is to become the government’s arts adviser.
In writing, the items are usually separated by a comma, and in speech they are often separated by a 
pause or other intonation break. However, when the second item acts like a deﬁ ning relative clause, 
when it is usually a name, there is usually no punctuation in writing or intonation break in speech:
 My friend Mia has moved to Sweden. (rather than My friend, Mia, …)
 The current champion is expected to survive her ﬁ  rst-round match with the Italian Silvia 
Farina. (rather than … the Italian, Silvia Farina.)
112
56
 The proposals – expected to be agreed by ministers – are less radical than many employers had 
feared.
Unit
113
Exercises
56. 1  Add the information in brackets to the sentences and rewrite them in an appropriate way, using 
the examples in A and B as models. A & B
1 Gofast Technology has launched its new generation of high-speed trains. (Gofast Technology is 
part of the Maddison Enterprises Group)
 Gofast Technology, part of the Maddison Enterprises Group, has launched its 
new generation of high-speed trains.  
2 I went on an IT training course with my colleague. (My colleague is Mateo)
3 Rubella is still a common childhood disease in many countries. (Another name for rubella is 
German measles)
4 Four kilos of Beluga caviar has been ordered for the reception. (Beluga caviar is among the most 
expensive foods in the world)
5 One of the most popular modern writers for children is John Marsden. (John Marsden is Australian)
6 Tonya’s father was in the crowd to watch her victory. (Tonya’s father has also been her trainer for 
the last ten years)
7 Dr Soﬁ a Lopez has criticised government plans to cut health funding. (Soﬁ a Lopez is head of 
Downlands Hospital)
8 Klaus Schmidt is running in the Stockholm Marathon. (Klaus Schmidt is the current European 
champion) (The German 10,000 metres record holder is also the current European champion)
56.2  Make sentences by matching the beginnings (in i) to the endings (in ii) and adding appropriate 
information (from iii) after namely or that is. C
(i) (ii) (iii)
1 Leo Tolstoy’s most 
celebrated novel,
2 The two countries 
having land borders 
with the USA,
3 The three most 
popular pets in Britain,
4 The capital of Estonia,
5 The largest island in 
the world,
6 The ‘consumers’ of 
education,
a   are found in 25% of households.
b   covers over 2 million square 
kilometres.
c   should have ways of 
complaining about poor 
teaching.
d   have complained to the 
President about the new 
customs regulations.
e  was published in 1869. 
f   is situated on the Gulf of 
Finland.
1 + e Leo Tolstoy’s most celebrated novel, namely War and Peace, was published 
in 1869.   
56.3  Complete the sentences with an -ing, -ed or being + -ed form of the verbs from the box. Then 
rewrite each sentence using a relative clause instead of the participle clause. D
 drive         educate        ﬂ ow        introduce        need        print        say        tell off
1 The man driving  the bus is my brother. The man who is driving the bus is my 
brother.
2 I went to a reunion for students  in the physics department during the 
1990s.
3 As my aunt told me what she thought, I felt like a schoolboy  by his 
headteacher.
4 There is a sign on the gate  ‘Entry forbidden’.
5 Across the river were some of the deer  into the park in the 19th century.
6 Rivers  into the Baltic Sea are much cleaner now than ten years ago.
7 The booklets  as we speak will be on sale later this afternoon.
8 Anyone  further information can see me in my ofﬁ ce.
56
 Tallinn        students        
 cats, dogs and rabbits        
 War and Peace 
 Mexico and Canada        
 Greenland
Unit
A
B
C
Other ways of adding information to noun phrases 2: 
prepositional phrases, etc.
Note that adding a series of prepositional phrases can often lead to ambiguity. For example:
 The protesters were demonstrating against the mistreatment of animals on farms.
could mean either that the place the protesters were demonstrating was ‘on farms’ or that the animals 
were ‘on farms’. We could make the sentence unambiguous with, for example:
 The protesters were demonstrating on farms against the mistreatment of animals. or
 The protesters were demonstrating against the mistreatment of animals kept on farms.
In written English, particularly in academic writing, a series of prepositional phrases and relative 
clauses is often used to add information about a previous noun phrase. Note that prepositional 
phrases can also be used with an adverbial function (e.g. ‘… taken the drug in the last six months’ in the 
sentence below):
 Doctors are contacting patients with diabetes  who have taken the drug in the last six months.
 Scientists in Spain  who have developed the technique are optimistic that it will be widely 
used in laboratories within the next decade.
We can also use participle clauses and noun phrases (see Unit 56) in a series of clauses / phrases which 
add information to the preceding noun phrase:
 The waxwing is the only bird found in Britain  with yellow and red tail feathers.
 Mr Bob Timms, leader of the Democratic Party,  MP for Threeoaks, 
has announced his resignation.
We commonly add information about a thing or person using a prepositional phrase. Often these have 
a meaning similar to a relative clause:
 What’s the name of the man by the window? (or … the man who’s by the window?)
 It’s in the cupboard under the stairs. (or … the cupboard that’s under the stairs.)
 She lives in the house with the red door. (or … the house which has the red door.)
In some cases, however, these prepositional phrases do not have a corresponding relative clause:
 You need to keep a careful record of what you spend.
 There is likely to be an increase in temperature tomorrow.
We often prefer a relative clause rather than a prepositional phrase in non-deﬁ ning relative clauses 
with be + preposition or with have as a main verb:
 Mr Chen, who was in the store at the time of the robbery, was able to identify two of the men. 
(rather than … Mr Chen, in the store …)
 Davide Gallo, who has a farm near Pisa, has decided to grow only organic vegetables. (rather 
than Davide Gallo, with a farm near Pisa, has …)
114
57

Unit
115
Exercises
57 . 1 Match the sentence halves (there may be more than one possible answer), adding an 
appropriate preposition. A
1 Maja’s the girl … a  … green shirts.
2 She’s in the photograph … b  … the back garden.
3 I plan to cut down the tree … c  … blonde hair. 
4 There’s a team of people … d  … the canal.
5 We took the footpath … e  … the piano.
6 The children can’t get over the fence … f  … Paris to Lyons.
7 Go along the lane … g  … the houses.
8 Nico’s a boy… h  … New Zealand.
9 Follow the main road… i  … the pool.
 10 She’s a teacher… j  … a quick temper.
1 + c Maja’s the girl with blonde hair.  
57 .2  Rewrite the sentences in 57 . 1 using deﬁ ning relative clauses. A
1 Maja’s the girl who has blonde hair.
57 .3  Complete the sentences by adding the information in brackets. Use relative clauses (Unit 53), 
additional noun phrases and participle clauses (Unit 56) and prepositional phrases (Unit 57).
1 Police are questioning men … between 25 and 30 living in the village, who are known 
to have a criminal record.  
 (The men are between 25 and 30. They live in the village. They are known to have a criminal record.)
2 Teachers 
  .
 (The teachers work at Queen’s College. Queen’s College is in the city centre. The teachers went on 
strike last week. They have appointed Kristina Borg as their spokesperson. She is the head of English.)
3 Marge Scott 
  .
 (Marge Scott has died. She was aged 95. She was educated at Marston College. She was the ﬁ rst 
woman to be educated there. Marston College is in south Wales.)
4 The conference 
  .
 (The conference was held in Singapore. It approved the world trade agreement. The agreement was 
drawn up by European and Asian states. The conference has now ended.)
5 A book 
  .
 (The book is on gardening. It is called All about Plants. Anna wanted to borrow it. It wasn’t available 
in the library.)
6 A painting 
  .
 (The painting was found in a second-hand shop. It was found by Lara Gruber. She is an antique 
dealer. She is from Austria. The painting is thought to be by J.M.W. Turner. Turner was a British 
landscape artist.)
57 .4  Why are these sentences ambiguous? Can you rewrite them to remove the ambiguity? C
1 A man was talking with a grey suit.  .
2 A lorry was stopped by a police ofﬁ cer carrying thousands of stolen cigarettes. 
  .
3 I discussed my plan to decorate the room with my parents. 
  .
57
Unit
A
B
C
D
E
Participle clauses with adverbial meaning 1
In formal English, the participle clause sometimes has its own subject, which is often a pronoun or 
includes one:
 The collection of vases is priceless, some being over 2000 years old.
 Her voice breaking with emotion, Vasiliki spoke about her father’s illness.
We use the present participle (-ing) clause to talk about something happening at the same time as an 
event in the main clause, or to give information about the facts given in the main clause.
When we use not in a participle clause it usually comes before the participle. However, it can follow 
the participle, depending on meaning:
 Not understanding the rules, I found the cricket match boring. (= because I didn’t understand 
the rules)
 Hoping not to be recognised, I chose a seat in a dark corner. (= I hoped that I wouldn’t be 
recognised)
We use a clause beginning with having + past participle rather than a present participle if the action 
in the main clause is the consequence of the event in the participle clause:
 Having broken her leg the last time she went, Giorgia decided not to go on the school skiing 
trip this year. (or After breaking her leg …; not Breaking her leg …)
We can use either a present participle (-ing) clause or a having + past participle clause with a 
similar meaning when the action in the participle clause is complete before the action in the main 
clause begins. Compare:
 Taking off his shoes, Ram walked into the house. (Having taken off … has a similar meaning) 
and
 Running across the ﬁ eld, I fell and hurt my ankle. (= While I was running …; ‘Having run …’ 
would suggest that I fell after I had run across the ﬁ eld)
The implied subject of a participle clause (that is, a subject known but not directly mentioned) is 
usually the same as the subject of the main clause:
 Arriving at the party, we saw Ruth standing alone. (= When we arrived … we saw …) 
However, sometimes the implied subject is not referred to in the main clause:
 Having wanted to drive a train all his life, this was an opportunity not to be missed.
In careful speech and writing we avoid different subjects for the participle and main clause:
 Turning round quickly, the door hit me in the face. (ﬁ  rst implied subject = ‘I’; second subject = 
‘the door’)
would be better as:
 When I turned round quickly, the door hit me in the face. 
We can use present participle (-ing) and past participle (-ed) clauses with 
an adverbial meaning. (See also Unit 59.) They often give information about 
the timing, causes, and results of the events described:
 Opening her eyes, the baby began to cry. (= When she opened her eyes …)
 Faced with a bill for £10,000, Ivan has taken an extra job. (= Because he is faced …)
 Looked after carefully, the plant can live through the winter. (= If it is looked after …)
 Having ﬁ nished the book, I had a holiday. (perfect; = When / Because I had ﬁ nished …)
 The fruit was expensive, being imported. (simple passive; = … because it was imported)
 Having been hunted close to extinction, the rhino is once again common in this area. (perfect 
passive; = Although it had been hunted close to extinction …)
116
58
Reminder ➜ J6–J10
Unit
117
Exercises
58. 1  Rewrite the sentences beginning with one of the clause forms from sections A and D opposite. 
A & D
1 When she saw the dog coming towards her, she quickly crossed the road. Seeing the dog 
coming towards her, she quickly crossed the road.
2 As she was dressed all in black, she was almost invisible in the starless night.
3 As I don’t have a credit card, I found it difﬁ cult to book an airline ticket online.
4 Antonio spent a lot of time ﬁ lling in job application forms because he was unemployed.
5 Because I was walking quickly, I soon caught up with her.
6 The house was built of wood, so it was clearly a ﬁ re risk.
7 I was eager to catch the bus in good time because I had been told off the day before for arriving 
late.
8 She didn’t know where the theatre was, so she asked for directions at the hotel reception.
9 As she was a nurse, she knew what to do after the accident.
 10 He had spent his childhood in Oslo, so he knew the city well.
58.2  If the implied subject of the two clauses is the same write S and if it is different write D. Rewrite 
the D sentences to make them more acceptable. B
1 Waiting for the bus, a car went through a puddle and splashed water all over me.
2 Known mainly as a writer of novels, Rashid has now written a successful biography.
3 Keeping a careful eye on the spider, Suzanne hurried out of the bathroom.
4 Looking down from the hill, the town spread out before us towards the coast.
5 Feeling rather sick, the boat ploughed through the huge waves.
6 Found only in the Andes, the plant is used by local people to treat skin diseases.
58.3  Write not in the more appropriate place in each sentence. D
1  wishing  to boast, she said nothing about her success.
2  pretending  to notice that people were staring at me, I carried on looking on 
the ﬂ oor for my lost contact lens.
3  determined  to be beaten, she put all her energy into the serve.
4  feeling  well, she went home early.
5  bothering  to put on his coat, he left the house.
6  trying  to cry, she waved to Harun as the train pulled out.
58.4  Join these sentences using having + past participle or the -ing form of the ﬁ rst verb. Which 
sentences can have either form? E
1  I moved house recently. 
2  I looked over my shoulder. 
3 I walked through the tunnel. 
4 I waited six weeks for the washing machine to be 
delivered. 
5 I suffered from depression myself as a teenager.
6 I parked the car about a kilometre from the stadium. 
7 I reached my mid-thirties. 
8 I learned some Swahili as a child. 
a  I decided to cancel the order.
b  I felt I needed to change my life. 
c  I could see Ida running after me.
d  I don’t yet have internet access. 
e   I was able to understand most of 
what she said.
f  I banged my head on the low roof.
g   I could understand how Nathan was 
feeling.
h  I walked the rest of the way.
1 + d Having moved house recently, I don’t yet have internet access.  
58
Unit
A
B
C
D
Participle clauses with adverbial meaning 2
with -ing; without -ing
With + -ing often introduces a reason for something in the main clause. This use is fairly informal. 
Note that a subject has to come between with and -ing:
 With Louise living in Spain, we don’t see her often. (= Because Louise lives in Spain …)
With and what with can also be used with a noun phrase to introduce a reason:
 With my bad back I won’t be able to lift a heavy suitcase.
 What with the trafﬁ c and the heavy rain, it’s no wonder you were late.
We can use without + -ing to say that a second action doesn’t happen:
 I went to work without eating breakfast.
 They left without paying.
Often, however, it has a similar meaning to ‘although … not’ or ‘unless’:
 Without meaning to, I seem to have offended her. (= Although I didn’t mean to …)
 Without using the app, I can’t judge how good it is. (= Unless I use the app …)
Adverbial meanings can also be added by a clause beginning with a conjunction or adjective but with 
no verb. This kind of clause has the same meaning as a clause beginning with a conjunction + subject 
+ be and is used in fairly formal English (more informal alternatives are given in brackets):
 While in Poland, they will play two concerts in Warsaw. (or While they are in Poland …)
 Although just two feet apart, they didn’t speak. (or Although they were just …) 
 I try to use public transport whenever possible. (or … whenever it is possible.)
 Unhappy with the decision, Johnson swore at the referee. (or Because he was unhappy …)
by, in, on + -ing
 By working hard, she passed her maths exam.
 They only survived by eating roots and berries in the forest.
= the -ing clause indicates
‘the method or means used’
 On returning from Beijing, he wrote to the Chinese embassy.
 Josh was the ﬁ  rst person I saw on leaving hospital.
= the -ing clause indicates
‘when’
 In criticising the painting, I knew I would offend her.
 In choosing Marco, the People’s Party has moved to the left.
= the -ing clause indicates 
‘cause’
We can often use by + -ing or in + -ing with a similar meaning, although by + -ing is preferred in 
informal contexts:
 In / By writing about Spanish culture, I came to understand the country better. (‘In writing 
…’ = the consequence of writing was to understand …; ‘By writing …’ = the method I used to 
understand the country better was to write…)
But compare:
 By telephoning every hour, she managed to speak to the doctor. (not In telephoning …; 
the method is the focus here, not the consequence)
We can use prepositions such as after, before, besides, by, in, on, since, 
through, while, with, and without in a present participle (-ing) clause 
with an adverbial meaning (see also Unit 58):
 While understanding her problem, I don’t know how I can help. (= Although I understand …)
 After spending so much money on the car, I can’t afford a holiday.
 Before being changed last year, the speed limit was 70 kph. (passive form)
An alternative is a clause with a verb that can change according to tense and subject. Compare:
 Since moving to London, we haven’t had time to go to the theatre. and
 Since we moved to London, we haven’t had time to go to the theatre. (less formal)
118
59
Reminder ➜ J6–J10
Unit
119
Exercises
59. 1  Complete these sentences using a preposition from (i) and the -ing form or being + past 
participle form of a verb from (ii). You may use the words from (i) more than once. A
(i) (ii)
after        before        since
through        while  
 come         interview        leave        overthrow
 sell        take        welcome        work
1 Since coming  out of hospital, I have been to the gym every day.
2  on TV last night, the minister mentioned that she would be 
retiring soon.
3  the back off the computer, make sure it is unplugged.
4  the government’s new policy, I think it should have been 
introduced months ago.
5  in a military takeover, the king has been under house arrest.
6  with young children for the last 40 years, she has come to 
understand their behaviour better than most.
7  to the public, most milk is pasteurised.
8  Oxford University in 1983, Painter spent three years teaching at a 
local school.
59.2  Join the sentences, beginning them with by + -ing, on + -ing, or in + -ing. B
1 She returned home.
2 She gave up sugar.
3 She turned down the job.
4 She moved to a smaller ﬂ at.
5 She entered the classroom.
6 She criticised her father.
a  She soon began to lose weight.
b  She saved over a hundred pounds a month. 
c  She knew that she might offend him.
d  She found Dave waiting outside her front door. 
e  She gave up the possibility of a huge salary.
f  She was surprised when all the children stood up.
1 + d On returning home, she found Dave waiting outside her front door.  
59.3  Rewrite these sentences beginning With … -ing or Without … -ing. C
1 We couldn’t go on holiday because Maryam had ﬂ u.
2 I won’t be able to advise you unless I have more information.
3 He had solved the problem, although he didn’t realise it.
4 I couldn’t wait for Andrei any longer as time was running out before the train left. . 
59.4  Revise this biography by replacing six more full clauses with reduced clauses (as in the 
examples in section D opposite), and making any other necessary changes. D
59
Although from a poor background
 Although she was from a poor background , Paula Regis gained a place at Southam 
University. She was always fascinated by the stars and she took a fi rst degree in 
astrophysics. Once she was at university she also became interested in student 
politics and, because she was popular with her fellow students, was elected University 
President in her second year. This didn’t distract her from her studies, however, 
and while she was in the fi nal year of her degree, she won the International Young 
Scientist of the Year award for her work on star classifi cation. When she was asked 
what was the secret of her success she said, ‘Just hard work and a little luck. ’ She is 
determined to continue her research and she has recently begun work on her PhD.
Unit
A
B
C
D
E
Reﬂ exive pronouns: herself, himself, 
themselves, etc.
If the object of a transitive verb refers to the same person or thing as the subject, then that object 
must be a reﬂ exive pronoun. Compare:
He walked around the golf course to familiarise 
himself with it. and
We walked around to familiarise the children 
with their new surroundings.
When the subject and object after a preposition refer to the same person or thing we use a reﬂ exive 
pronoun after the preposition:
He was pleased with himself. (not … pleased with him.)
If the verb has a direct object we use a personal pronoun, not a reﬂ exive pronoun:
 I remember closing the door behind me. (not … closing the door behind myself.)
However, if we need to make it clear that the subject and prepositional phrase refer to the same 
person or thing, we use a reﬂ exive pronoun after the preposition:
She bought the bracelet for herself. (‘… for her’ suggests it was bought for someone else)
Myself is sometimes used after and and or rather than ‘I’ or ‘me’, although some people consider this 
use incorrect and avoid it:
I believe that Lizi and myself have done a pretty good job.
 When you’ve ﬁ  nished the job can you send the bill either to Mrs Petrov or myself?
Using myself reduces focus on the speaker or writer and so sounds less forceful or more polite.
We can use reﬂexive pronouns for emphasis in various ways. We also use reﬂexive pronouns 
to emphasise that the subject caused a certain action. Compare
Salma worked hard and got promoted.
Salma worked hard and got herself promoted. (emphasises that it was through her own 
efforts)
Salma encouraged me to apply for the senior manager position, but she got promoted herself. 
(emphasises that Salma got promoted, not me)
In addition to the usual reﬂ  exive pronouns (myself, yourself, etc.) some 
people use themselves to refer to the person who is the subject of the 
sentence, to avoid saying whether the subject is male or female:
The author of the letter describes themselves as ‘a senior government ofﬁ cial’.
Who wants to go through life by themselves, without friends?
Oneself (or less formally yourself) is used to refer to people in general:
 I think one has to have the courage to be oneself and say whatever comes naturally. (less 
formally I think you have to have the courage to be yourself …)
120
60
Reminder ➜ K1–K4
Also: absent ... from, avail ... of, busy 
... with, concern ... with, occupy ... by 
/  with, pride ... on, tear ... away from, 
trouble ... about / with
With some verbs we can use a reﬂ  exive pronoun or leave it out with little difference in meaning:
We are conﬁ  dent that both sets of fans will 
behave (themselves) at the match.
Also: acclimatise, adapt, (un)dress, 
hide, move, prepare, shave, wash
We include the reﬂ exive pronoun if we want to emphasise that the person or thing referred to in the 
subject is affected by the action: 
Although she helped other athletes in their preparations for competing at high altitudes, she 
found it difﬁ cult to acclimatise herself.
Unit
121
Exercises
 60
60. 1  Complete each sentence with a suitable form of a verb from the box followed by a reﬂ exive 
pronoun and, if necessary, a preposition. If the reﬂ  exive pronoun can be omitted, put brackets 
around it. C
absent        adapt         concern         dress        occupy        prepare        pride        trouble
1 She works for a charity which concerns itself with  the welfare of children.
2 She  for the interview by reading the job description again.
3 It is a town that  being welcoming to visitors.
4 While I was working, the children  playing computer games.
5 It will take you some time to  to the pace of life in Tokyo.
6 Jack just expects to be given a job without making any effort. He won’t even 
 ﬁ lling in any application forms.
7 When Jade broke her arm she couldn’t  properly, so I had to go round 
each morning to help.
8 Peter arranged to  the company for the ﬁ rst time in his life so that he 
could spend time with his father in hospital.
60.2  Underline the correct option. If both options are possible, note the difference in meaning. D
1 Can you post this letter for myself / me, please?
2 All my friends were away, I was bored, and I just didn’t know what to do with myself / me.
3 We put the voice recorder on the table between ourselves / us.
4 They dragged the tree behind themselves / them all the way to the trailer.
5 Now that you’re a famous actor, you must hear a lot about yourself / you  in the media.
6 He ought to be ashamed of himself / him, being rude to his parents like that.
7 She should take care of herself / her better. She’s looking really ill.
8 I opened the window in front of myself / me and took a deep breath of fresh air.
60.3  If necessary, correct the italicised parts of this email or write ✓. Give alternatives where 
possible. A–E
Hi Dana,
Yes, Jan’s a lot better, thanks. We (1) got vaccinated ourselves against hepatitis 
before we went to West Africa, so Jan was just unlucky to get it. He went into work 
after we got back although he was feeling bad, and some of his colleagues were 
worried about (2) getting it themselves. I know that some of them (3) had checked 
themselves by their doctors. By coincidence, his boss said that (4) he’d caught 
himself hepatitis when he was in Africa a few years ago. When he’s completely 
recovered, (5) Jan and myself are off to Paris for a few days – if I can get Jan 
(6) to tear him awayIURPKLVRI¿ FH±DQGZH¶UHgoing to occupy us with
looking at the galleries and having a rest.
Must go now. The children have just shouted that they want some juice and 
(8) they can’t reach it themself.
Will be in touch, Nika
Unit
A
B
C
D
One and ones
We can leave out one / ones –
 after which:
 When we buy medicines, we have no way of knowing which (ones) contain sugar.
 after superlatives:
 Look at that pumpkin! It’s the biggest (one) I’ve seen this year. 
 after this, that, these, and those:
 The last test I did was quite easy, but some parts of this (one) are really difﬁ cult.
 Help yourself to grapes. These (ones) are the sweetest, but those (ones) taste best.
(Note that some people think ‘those / these ones’ is incorrect, particularly in formal English.)
 after either, neither, another, each, the ﬁ rst / second / last, (etc.):
 Karl pointed to the paintings and said I could take either (one). (or … either of them.)
 She cleared away the cups, washed each (one) thoroughly, and put them on the shelf.
We don’t leave out one / ones –
 after the, the only, the main, and every:
 When you cook clams you shouldn’t eat the ones that have broken shells. 
 After I got the glasses home, I found that every one was broken.
 after adjectives:
 My shoes were so uncomfortable that I had to go out today and buy some new ones. 
However, after colour adjectives we can often leave out one / ones in answers:
 ‘Have you decided which jumper to buy?’ ‘Yes, I think I’ll take the blue (one).’
We don’t use one / ones after nouns used as adjectives:
 I thought my memory stick was in my trouser pocket, but it was in my coat pocket. 
(not … my coat one.)
Instead of using one / ones after possessive determiners (my, your, her, etc.) we prefer mine, yours, 
hers, etc. However, a possessive determiner + one / ones is often heard in informal speech:
 I’d really like a smartphone like yours. (or ‘… like your one’ in informal speech)
We usually use ones to refer to things rather than people:
 We need two people to help. We could ask those men over there. ( not … ask those ones …)
However, ones is more likely to be used in comparative sentences to refer to groups of people:
 Older students seem to work harder than younger ones. (or … than younger students.) 
Note also that we use ones to refer to people in the little ones (= small children), (your) loved ones 
(= usually close family), (one of) the lucky ones.
We can use one instead of repeating a singular countable noun and ones instead of repeating a plural 
noun when it is clear from the context what we are talking about:
 ‘Can I get you a drink?’ ‘It’s okay, I’ve already got one.’ (= a drink)
 I think his best poems are his early ones. (= poems)
We don’t use one / ones instead of an uncountable noun:
 If you need any more paper, I’ll bring you some. ( not … I’ll bring you one / ones.)
 I asked him to get apple juice, but he got orange. ( not … but he got orange one / ones.)
We can’t use ones without deﬁ ning precisely which group of things we are talking about. Instead, we 
use some. Compare:
 ‘We need new curtains.’ ‘Okay, let’s buy green ones this time. / … ones with ﬂ owers on / … 
those ones.’  and
 ‘We need new curtains.’ ‘Okay, let’s buy some.’ (not Okay, let’s buy ones.)
122
61
Unit
123
Exercises
 61
61.1  If necessary, correct these sentences. If they are already correct, write ✓. A
1. Bilal brought in the wood and put ones on the ﬁ re.
2 Normally I don’t like wearing a scarf, but it was so cold I put one on.
3 A: We’ve run out of potatoes.   B: I’ll get ones when I go to the shops.
4 We haven’t got lemon tea, but you could have mint one instead.
5 Those aren’t your gloves. You must have picked up the wrong ones.
6 A: What kind of cakes do you like best?   B: Ones with cream inside.
7 I couldn’t ﬁ t all the boxes in the car, so I had to leave ones behind and pick it up later.
8 Most of the trees in our garden are less than ten years old but ones are much older than that.
61.2  If appropriate, replace the italicised words or phrases with one or ones. If it is not possible or 
unlikely, write ‘No’ after the sentence. A & B
1 I answered most of the questions, but had to miss out some very difﬁ cult questions.
2 The female violinists in the orchestra outnumber the male violinists by about three to one.
3 He used to work for a ﬁ nance company, but he’s moved to an insurance company.
4 The issue discussed at the meeting was an extremely complicated issue.
5 Many people are happy about the new road being built, but there are some angry people, too.
6 A: Was it these earrings you wanted?   B: No, the earrings on the left of those, please.
7 Diana is really good at taking photos of old buildings. There’s an excellent photo of a local church 
in her ofﬁ ce.
8 A: Are you picking Jo up at the train station?   B: No, she’s arriving at the bus station.
9 On one channel was a war ﬁ lm and on the other was a horror ﬁ lm, so I turned the TV off.
 10 There are lots of gloves here. Are these your  gloves?
61.3  If the italicised one or ones can be omitted in these sentences, put brackets around it. If not, 
write ✓. C & D
1 The children had eaten all the pizza and were still hungry so I had to make them another (one).
2 I drove around the houses, looking for the ones with ‘For Sale’ notices outside. ✓
3 I’m not keen on those ones with the cherry on top. I think I’ll have a chocolate biscuit instead.
4 I like both of these jackets. I don’t know which one to choose.
5 The vases are all handmade and every one looks different.
6 Each winter seemed to be colder than the last one.
7 There are many excellent food markets in town but the main one is near the port.
8 She tried on lots of pairs of shoes and ﬁ nally chose the purple ones.
9 The books were so disorganised that I soon lost track of which ones I had already counted.
 10 Can you remember where you bought this one? I’d like to get one myself.
61.4  Complete these sentences with one or ones followed by an ending of your own. C & D
1 Carmen drove to the restaurant because she was the only … 
  .
2 To help keep ﬁ t, go to shops you can walk or cycle to rather than … 
  .
3 A number of causes of climate change have been suggested, but the main  … 
  .
4 Camera tripods come in a variety of sizes and materials, but the most convenient … 
  .
Unit
A
B
C
D
E
So and not as substitutes for clauses, etc.
In negative sentences, we use not or not … so:
 Is the Socialist Party offering anything new in its statement? It would appear not.
 They want to buy the house, although they did n’t say so directly.
We can use either not or not … so with appear, seem, suppose:
 ‘I don’t suppose there’ll be any seats left.’ ‘No, I do n’t suppose so.’ (or ... I suppose not.)
We prefer not … so with believe, expect, imagine, think. With these verbs, not is rather formal:
 ‘Will we need to show our passports?’ ‘I do n’t think so.’ (rather than I think not.)
We use not with be afraid (expressing regret), assume, guess (in the phrase ‘I guess …’, = ‘I think …’), 
hope, presume, suspect:
 ‘You’d better do it yourself. Eva won’t help.’ ‘No, I guess not.’ (not No, I don’t guess so.)
Compare the use of not (to) and not … so with say:
 ‘Do we have to do all ten questions?’ ‘The teacher said not.’ (= the teacher said that we didn’t 
have to) or ‘The teacher said not to.’ (= the teacher said that we shouldn’t)
 ‘Do we have to do all ten questions?’ ‘The teacher did n’t say so.’ (= the teacher didn’t say that 
we should do all ten, but perhaps we should)
We can use so in a short answer, instead of a short answer with ‘Yes, …’, when we want to say that we 
can see that something is true now that we have been told, particularly if we are surprised. In answers 
like this we use so + pronoun + auxiliary verb (be, can, etc.):
 ‘Lisa and Sara are here.’ ‘ So they are.’ (or Yes, they are.) (= I can now see that, too)
However, if we already know something we use ‘Yes, …’, not ‘So ...’. Compare:
 ‘Your bike’s been moved.’ ‘ So it has. / Yes, it has. I wonder who did it.’ (= I didn’t know before 
you told me) and
 ‘Your bike’s been moved.’ ‘ Yes, it has. Philip borrowed it this morning.’ (= I knew before you 
told me; not So it has.)
We can use so in a similar way in short answers with verbs such as appear (after ‘it’), believe, gather, 
hear, say, seem, tell (e.g. So she tells me.), understand. However, with these verbs, the pattern 
implies ‘I knew before you told me’:
 ‘I found that lecture really boring.’ ‘ So I gather (= I knew that). I saw you sleeping.’
We often use so instead of a clause after verbs concerned with thinking 
and speaking:
 ‘Is Lewis going back to Scotland to see 
his parents this summer?’ ‘I’ve no idea, 
but I’d imagine so. He goes most years.’
 I found it ridiculous, and said so. / ... 
and told them so. (= that I found it ridiculous)  
Note that after ‘tell’ we include an indirect object.
We don’t use so after certain other verbs:
 ‘Will Stefan know how to mend it?’ 
‘I doubt it. / I doubt (that) he will.’ 
(not I doubt so.)  
Note that in informal English, particularly in an argument, we can use ‘I know so’.
We can use so instead of repeating an adjective, adverb, or a whole clause:
 The workers were angry and they had every right to be so. (= angry)
 Joe took the work seriously and Petra perhaps even more so. (= took the work seriously)
 Usman’s giving us a lift. At least I presume so. (= that he’s giving us a lift)
124
62
Reminder ➜ K10–K12
Also: be afraid (expressing regret), appear / 
seem (after ‘it’), assume, believe, expect, 
guess, hope, presume, suppose, suspect, 
think 
Also: accept, admit, agree, be certain, 
hear, know, promise, suggest, be sure
Unit
125
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 12 (page 248)
62
62. 1  If possible, complete the dialogues with so. If not, use an appropriate that-clause. B
1 A: Is Zak ill again?   B: Well, he hasn’t come to work, so I assume so.  
2 A: Will we need to pay to get in?   B: I doubt that we will.  
3 A: Will you be able to come over this weekend?   B: I hope  .
4  A: Can you give me a lift to work?   B: I suppose  .
5 A: Is this one by Van Gogh, too?   B: I think  .
6 A: Apparently Carol’s getting married again. B: Yes, I hear  .
7 A: The weather’s awful, so we’ll need to take a taxi.   B: I guess  .
8 A: Will the decorator be ﬁ nished this week?   B: He says  .
9 A: You will remember to pick me up at one, won’t you?   B: I promise  .
 10 A: I hope I’ll be able to get a ticket.   B: I’m sure  .
62.2  Underline all the correct B responses. B & C
1 A: With the children being ill I haven’t had time to do much housework.   
B: No, I suppose not / don’t suppose / don’t suppose so.
2 A: Did I leave my handbag in your car yesterday?   
B: I don’t think / don’t think so / think not.
3 A: I’m sure the bank has charged me too much. Will they refund the money?   
B: I don’t suspect / suspect not / don’t suspect so.
4 A: Didn’t Alice hear you?   B: It doesn’t appear so / appears not / doesn’t appear.
5 A: What did you think of Sadia’s work?   
B: Well, I thought it was pretty awful, although I didn’t say so / said not / said so.
62.3  Complete B’s responses with short 
answers beginning Yes, … . If possible, 
give an alternative response 
with So …. D
1 A: That horse is walking with a limp. 
 B: Yes, it is. / So it is.  Perhaps we should tell the owner.
2 A: The children from next door are taking the apples from our trees. 
B:  . I said they could come round and get them.
3 A: The DVD player’s gone again.   B:  . Dr Adams has probably borrowed it.
4 A: I told you I’d be late for work today.   
B:  . I agree. But you didn’t say how late – it’s nearly two.
62.4  Choose any appropriate short answer beginning So … to respond to A’s comments below, 
to say that B already knew what is being said. Use the verbs in E opposite. E
1 A: My car won’t start again.   B: So I hear.
2 A: Maria’s not very well.   B: 
3 A: The class has been cancelled again.   B: 
4 A: I see income tax is going up.   B: 
5 A: Fred’s moving to Berlin.   B: 

Unit
A
B
C
Do so; such
Such
We can use such + (a / an) + noun to refer back to something mentioned before, with the meaning 
‘of this / that kind’. We use such + noun when the noun is uncountable or plural, and such + a / an + 
noun when the noun is countable and singular. Such is used in this way mainly in formal speech and 
writing:
 The students refer to teachers by their ﬁ  rst names and will often criticise them for badly 
prepared lessons. Such behaviour is unacceptable in most schools. (more informally 
Behaviour like this …)
 When asked about rumours that the company is preparing to lose more than 200 jobs, a 
spokeswoman said: ‘I know of no such plans.’ (more informally … no plans of this kind.)
 They needed someone who was both an excellent administrator and manager. Such a person 
was not easy to ﬁ nd. (more informally A person like this …)
 We allow both men and women to have time off work to look after children. We were the ﬁ rst 
department to introduce such a scheme. (more informally … a scheme like this.)
We can use do so instead of verbs that describe actions, but we avoid do so with verbs that describe 
states and habitual actions. Compare:
 65% of the members voted for Katie Brown this time, whereas 84% did so last year.
 Kenyon confessed to the murder, although he only did so after a number of witnesses had 
identiﬁ ed him as the killer.
 I gave her the medicine, and I take full responsibility for doing so. and
 Lars doesn’t like Facebook but Emma does.
 He earned a lot more than I did.
 I don’t have time to go swimming every day, but I usually do.
Do so
We use do so (or does so, did so, doing so, etc.) instead of repeating a verb phrase (a verb and what 
follows it to complete its meaning) when the context makes clear what we are talking about:
 She won in 2012 and seems likely to do so (= win) again this year.
 Dr Lawson said, ‘Sit down.’ Katia did so (= sat down), and explained her problem.
 The climbers will try again today to reach the summit of the mountain. Their chances of doing 
so (= reaching the summit of the mountain) are better than they were last week. (In very 
formal English we can also use so doing.)
 When he was asked to check the ﬁ  gures, he claimed that he had already done so. (= checked 
the ﬁ gures)
Do so is most often used in formal spoken and written English. In informal English we can use do it or 
do that instead:
 Mrs Chen waved as she walked past. She does so / it / that every morning.
 Ricardo told me to put in a new battery. I did so / it / that, but the radio still doesn’t work.
We can also use do alone rather than do so in less formal English, especially after modals or perfect 
tenses (see also B):
 ‘Will this program work on your computer?’ ‘It should do.’
 I told you that I’d ﬁ  nish the work by today, and I have done. (‘have’ is stressed here)
126
63
Unit
127
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 12 (page 248)
63
63. 1  Join each pair of sentences with either and or but, replacing the repeated verb + object / 
complement with a form of do followed by so. A
1 Johnson never won an Olympic medal. He twice came close to winning an Olympic medal. 
Johnson never won an Olympic medal, but twice came close to doing so.  
2 She was asked to teach more classes. She was happy to teach more classes.
 
3 My French hosts gave me snails to eat. I ate them very reluctantly.
 
4 The company wanted to build a new dam on the site. They were prevented from building the 
dam by local opposition.
 
5 All EU countries agreed to implement the new regulations on recycling plastic. So far only 
Finland and Austria have implemented the new regulations.
 
6 The water freezes in the cracks in rocks. As it freezes, it expands.
 
63.2  Complete these sentences with a form of do (+ so if possible). B
1 If you have not already handed in the form, then please  without delay.
2 Olav drives much faster than you  .
3 He jumped down from the window, but in  twisted his ankle.
4 I know that many people don’t enjoy Felipe’s blog, but I   .
5 Anyone crossing the railway  at their own risk.
6 I thought Julie was joking when she said these apples smell like oranges. But they  !
7 When we play tennis Leyla usually wins, and she gets upset if I  .
8 She pointed to the old box, her hand shaking as she  .
63.3  Complete the sentences with such or such a / an followed by a word from the box in the 
singular or plural. C
claim        destruction         device         project        research        tactic
1 Manufacturers often claim that their washing machines have built-in computers, but is there 
really a computer in such a device ?  
2 After Professor Sharma spoke about her work on climate change, she called on the government 
to put more money into  . 
3  Television is sometimes said to harm children’s social development, yet the evidence for 
 is often lacking.
4 Building a new power station would undoubtedly create new jobs, but has the environmental 
impact of  been considered fully?
5 The earthquake demolished thousands of buildings. The country has rarely seen 
 before.
6 United played very defensively in the second half, but  were criticised by the 
team’s supporters.
63.4  Rewrite the sentences in 63.3 to make them less formal. C
1 ...but is there really a computer in a device like this? / ... like that?
Unit
A
B
C
D
More on leaving out words after auxiliary verbs
If we use have as an auxiliary verb, we can often follow it with done instead of repeating the main 
verb. This happens particularly in spoken English:
 ‘She’s never made a mistake before.’ ‘Well, she has (done) this time.’
However, this is usually not possible when the verb being substituted is intransitive:
 ‘They’ve already gone.’ ‘I don’t think Daniel has.’ (not … Daniel has done.)
Similarly, after a modal auxiliary verb (can, could, may, might, must, ought to, shall, should, will, 
would) we can use do, particularly in spoken English:
 ‘Will you be seeing David today?’ ‘I might (do).’
Sometimes we can use be instead of do with a similar meaning (see also D):
 ‘Will you be seeing Felix today?’ ‘I might (do / be).’ (‘do’ replaces ‘see Felix today’; ‘be’ 
replaces ‘be seeing Felix today’.)
If we use be as an auxiliary verb in the previous clause or sentence, we can use be after a modal:
 ‘Is Ella staying for lunch?’ ‘Yes, I think she will (be).’ (or … she will do.)
However, if be is used as a main verb in the previous clause or sentence, or as an auxiliary verb within a 
passive, we can usually leave out be after a modal in informal contexts only. Compare:
 ‘Lina’ s late again.’ ‘I thought she might (be).’ and
 It has been found that the comet is made entirely of gas, as it was predicted it would be.
If there is no auxiliary verb in the previous clause or sentence, or if the auxiliary is a form of do, we can 
use a form of do instead of repeating the main verb. We use do when the main verb is a present simple 
form and did when it is a past simple form:
 Mona plays golf on Saturdays, and I do too. (instead of … and I play golf on Saturdays too.; 
‘… and so do I’ is also possible)
 ‘I didn’t steal the money.’ ‘No one thinks that you did.’ (instead of … thinks that you stole it.; 
‘No one thinks so’ is also possible.)
If be is the main verb in the previous clause or sentence, we repeat a form of the verb be:
 ‘The children are noisy again.’ ‘They always are.’
If have or have got is the main verb in the previous clause or sentence, we can usually use a form of 
either do or have:
 ‘Do you think I have a chance of winning?’ ‘Yes, I think you have.’ (or … you do.; ‘Yes, I think 
so’ is also possible.)
 Even if he hasn’t got a map himself, he may know someone who has. (or … who does.)
However, if we use have + noun in the previous clause or sentence to talk about actions (have a 
shower, have a shave, have a good time, etc.) we prefer do:
 I wasn’t expecting to have a good time at the party, but I did.
Note that sometimes we can use either do, be or have with a similar meaning (see also C):
 I asked Clara to tidy her room, and she has / did. (‘has’ replaces ‘has tidied her room’; ‘did’ 
replaces ‘tidied her room’.)
To avoid repeating words from a previous clause or sentence we use an auxiliary verb (be, have, can, 
will, would, etc.) instead of a whole verb group or instead of a verb and what follows it:
 She says she’s ﬁ  nished, but I don’t think she has. (instead of … has ﬁ nished.)
 ‘Would any of you like to go to Paris?’ ‘I would.’ (instead of I would like to go to Paris.)
If there is more than one auxiliary verb in the previous clause or sentence, we leave out all the auxiliary 
verbs except the ﬁ rst instead of repeating the main verb. Alternatively, we can use two (or more) 
auxiliary verbs:
 ‘They could have been delayed by the snow.’ ‘Yes, they could.’ (or … could have (been).)
128
64
Unit
129
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 12 (page 248)
64. 1  Make B’s replies shorter by crossing out some of the words in italics. Give alternatives if 
possible. A
1 A: Have you ever played squash before?   B: Yes, I have  played squash before. 
2 A: I suppose we should have booked tickets.   B: Yes, we should have booked tickets.
3 A: Will you be staying in Brazil permanently?   B: Yes, we will be staying in Brazil permanently.
4 A: All the parking places will probably have been taken by now.   
B: Yes, I’m sure they will have been taken by now.
5 A: Have you had dinner yet?   B: No, I haven’t had dinner yet.
6 A: Are you going to Katalin’s party?   B: Yes, I am going to Katalin’s party.
7  A: If Diane hadn’t given you a lift, you would have missed the train.   
B: Yes, I would have missed the train.
8 A: Can you see Joe anywhere?   B: No, I can’t see him anywhere.
9 A: Did you see that cyclist go through the red light? He couldn’t have been looking.   
B: No, he couldn’t have been looking.
64.2  Complete the sentences with an appropriate form of do, be or have (plus any alternatives). Put 
brackets around the word if it can be omitted, and write (done) after forms of have where this 
might be added. B & C
1 I haven’t ﬁ  nished doing the translation yet, but I will have (done)  by tomorrow morning.
2 As a child I always enjoyed watching cartoons on TV, and I still  .
3 A: Has the post arrived yet?   B: No, I don’t think it  .
4 Have a shower if you want, but take a towel from the cupboard when you  .
5 A: It costs a fortune to rent a ﬂ at in the city centre.   B: I’m sure it must  .
6 I was hoping Ryan had an electric drill that I could borrow, but he  .
7 I’m not a member of the tennis club myself, but I know someone who  .
8 I told the class that they had to hand in their books by nine and they all  .
9 A: Have you got a copy of Great Expectations?   B: Yes, I think I  .
 10 A: I’ve got £100 with me. Will that be enough?   B: It should  .
64.3  Complete the sentences with might, should, will or would, (plus any alternatives). If 
necessary, write be after the modal, or (be) if it is possible to omit it. D
1 It’s not snowing at the moment, but they say it will / might (be)  .
2 Chris was cleaning the house when I got home, as I hoped he  .
3 A: Are they staying for lunch?   B: They  . I’ll ask them.
4 A: Are you revising a lot for the exams?   B: Not as much as I  .
5 The company has not been as successful as it was claimed it  .
6 Natalie says she’s very sorry – as she  .
7 The book is a bestseller, as we hoped it  .
8 A: My photograph was awarded ﬁ rst prize.   B: I thought it  .
64

Unit
A
B
C
Leaving out to-inﬁ nitives
After want and would like in if-clauses and wh-clauses we can often leave out a to-inﬁ nitive or use 
to:
 You’re welcome to dance if you’d like (to).
 You can do whatever you would like (to).
 Call me Ben  if you want (to).
 Come and see us when you want (to).
In other clauses (not if- and wh-clauses) we include to:
 I was planning to see you tomorrow, and I would still like to.
 I offered to clean your car because I really want to, not because I hope to be paid.
In if-clauses and wh-clauses we usually leave out to after like. Compare:
 You can have one if you like. and You can have one if you’d like (to).
 Leave whenever you like. and Leave whenever you’d like (to).
However, we include to with negative forms of want, would like, and like, including in if-clauses and 
wh-clauses:
 ‘Shall we go and visit Laura?’ ‘I don’t really want to.’
 I should have phoned Jo last night, but it was so late when I got home I didn’t like to.
 ‘He won’t mind you asking him for a loan.’ ‘Oh, no, I wouldn’t like to.’
After most nouns and adjectives that can be followed by a to-inﬁ nitive clause, we can leave out the 
to-inﬁ nitive clause or use to:
 I’m not going to write another book – at least 
I don’t have any plans (to). (or … plans to 
write another book.)
 ‘Could you and Tom help me move house?’ 
‘Well, I’m willing (to), and I’ll ask Tom.’ 
We can also leave out a to-inﬁ nitive or use to with some verbs:
 Alex will collect us by 10 o’clock. He promised (to). 
 ‘You were supposed to buy some sugar.’ ‘Sorry, I 
forgot (to).’ 
After verbs which must have a complement (i.e. a phrase which completes the meaning of the verb) 
we can’t leave out to:
 I admit that I took her watch, but I didn’t mean to. 
 Have you thought about getting vaccinated against 
cholera before going there? I’d certainly advise you to.  
We can sometimes use to instead of a clause beginning with a to-inﬁ nitive when it is clear from the 
context what we are talking about:
 I wanted to come with you, but I won’t be able to. (instead of … to come with you.)
 It might have been better if Rosa had asked for my help, but she chose not to. (instead of … 
chose not to ask for my help.)
However, when we use the verb be in the previous sentence or clause the to-inﬁ nitive form of be is 
repeated in the next clause or sentence:
 Leon was frightened – or maybe he just pretended to be. (not … just pretended to.)
130
65
Also: chance, idea, opportunity, 
promise, suggestion; afraid, 
delighted, determined
Also: afford, be able, choose, 
deserve, expect, fail, hate, 
hope, intend, love, need, prefer
Also: agree, ask, begin, refuse, 
start, try
Unit
131
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 12 (page 248)
65. 1  Rewrite the italicised part of each sentence so that it has a similar meaning. Use a verb from the 
box (use each verb twice) followed by to or to be. A  
claimed        expected        pretended        used
1  Was she really as good at tennis as she said she was? claimed to be
2  She occupies a much less important role in the company than she did before. 
 
3  Lucia was frightened – or maybe she just acted as if she was. 
 
4  Dan has lost a lot of weight. He’s much thinner than he was before. 
 
5  The last government didn’t represent the majority of people, although it said that it did. 
 
6  My family enjoyed my singing, or at least they made believe that they did. 
 
7  The Pantheon in Rome wasn’t anything like I imagined it. 
 
8  I didn’t get an interview for the job although I thought that I would. 
 
65.2  Complete the sentences. Write to if it is necessary; write (to) if it can be included or omitted. 
B
1 I’ve always wanted to go white-water rafting, but I’ve never had the opportunity 
before.
2 Luka had to admit that he’d failed, even though he obviously hated  .
3 When the police ofﬁ cer told the crowd to leave the square they refused  .
4 I don’t have to walk to work. I do it because I choose  .
5 We didn’t want Alina to leave college, but she was determined  .
6 Spain won 3–0, and deserved  , after a ﬁ ne performance.
7 A: Shall we ask Dad before we borrow the car?   B: Yes, it might be a good idea  .
8 A: Would you present the prizes for the competition?   B: I’d be delighted  .
9 A: Would you like to travel ﬁ rst class?   B: Well, yes, I’d certainly prefer  .
 10 I was hoping to go to Russia this year, but I can’t afford  .
65.3   If necessary, correct B’s responses. If they are already correct, write ✓. C
1 A: Can I have a biscuit?   B: Take more than one if you like to.
2 A: When shall we start playing the music?   B: Whenever you’d like.
3 A: Will Sara be able to play?   B: I asked her, but she says she doesn’t want.
4 A: I can’t come out tonight, I’m seeing Emma.   B: She can join us, if she’d like to.
5 A: Where are you going to in Norway?   B: I haven’t decided yet. I’ll just go where I want.
6 A: I don’t think I’ll go after all.   B: That’s okay. You don’t have to if you don’t want.
7 A: Can the children come too?   B: Yes, of course, if they want.
8 A: Shall we go out walking tomorrow?   B: Yes, I’d like very much.
9 A: Could I ask you a personal question?   B: Of course. Ask anything you like to.
 10 A: Did you ask Dr Mori to help you?   B: No, he was very busy, so I didn’t like.
65

Unit
A
B
C
D
Position of adjectives
Emphasising adjectives are used to emphasise your feelings about something. Compare:
 I felt a fool.     and         I felt a complete fool. (for emphasis)
Some emphasising adjectives (such as complete, and also absolute, entire, mere, sheer, total, 
utter) are seldom or never used after a linking verb:
 It was a total failure. (but not usually The failure was total.)
Classifying adjectives are used to say that something is of a particular type. Like emphasising 
adjectives, classifying adjectives are seldom or never used after a linking verb: 
 a nuclear explosion (but not usually 
‘The explosion was nuclear’, unless we 
particularly want to emphasise a 
contrast with other kinds of explosion)
Many adjectives can be used immediately after a noun, at the beginning of a reduced relative clause 
(see Unit 69B). For example –
 adjectives before a to-inﬁ nitive, or a prepositional phrase as part of the adjective phrase:
 It was a speech calculated to appeal to the unions.
 He is a manager capable of making difﬁ cult decisions.
 some -ible and -able adjectives such as available, imaginable, possible, suitable. However, we use 
these adjectives immediately after a noun only when the noun follows the or when the noun is made 
deﬁ nite by what follows in a relative clause:
 This was the most difﬁ cult decision imaginable.
 It is a treatment suitable for all children with asthma.
 the adjectives concerned, involved, opposite, present, proper, responsible. These words have 
different meanings when they are used before a noun and immediately after it. Compare:
 All the people present (= who were there) approved of the decision. and
 I was asked for my present address. (= my address now)
Some adjectives are seldom or never used before the noun they describe. These include – 
 some ‘ a-’ adjectives:
 The horse was alone in the ﬁ eld. 
(but not The alone horse ...) 
Some have related adjectives that can be used before a noun or after a linking verb. Compare: 
 The animal was alive. and A living animal. 
 ( or A live animal. / The animal was living.)
Many adjectives can be used either before the noun they describe, or following linking verbs such as 
appear, be, become, feel, get, and seem (see Unit 21). Compare:
 The high price surprised him.     and         The price seemed high.
132
66
Also: afraid, alike, alive, ashamed, asleep, awake, aware
Also: afraid – frightened, alike – similar, 
alone – lone, asleep – sleeping
Also: atomic, chemical, digital, domestic, 
environmental, medical; general, occasional, 
northern (etc.), maximum, minimum, underlying
Qualitative adjectives are used to give the quality that a thing or person has. We use them either 
directly before a noun or after a linking verb. Compare:
 a beautiful sunset  The sunset was beautiful. 
Note that some classifying adjectives can also be used with different meanings as qualitative 
adjectives and placed after a linking verb. Compare:
 The country’s economic reforms.   and
 The process isn’t economic. (= not proﬁ table)
Also: academic, conscious, 
educational, (il)legal, scientiﬁ c
 some adjectives used to describe health and feelings:
 My son felt unwell. (but not My unwell son ...)
These are sometimes used between an adverb 
and noun e.g. ‘a terminally ill patient’.
Also: content, ﬁ ne, glad, ill (but ‘ill 
health’), sorry, (un)sure, upset (but ‘an 
upset stomach’), well (but ‘He’s really 
not a well man’)
Unit
133
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 13 (page 248)
66. 1  If necessary, correct these sentences, or write ✓ if they are already correct. B
1 After the accident I tried to comfort the upset driver of the car.
After the accident I tried to comfort the driver of the car, who was upset.
2 In the distance I could see an alone ﬁ gure walking towards me.
3 It wasn’t a great surprise when Rahim died as he hadn’t been a well man for years.
4 I remember her as a glad person who was always smiling.
5 He stood at the bedroom door, looking at his asleep daughter.
6 The ﬁ re on the ship is under control, but there are still many afraid passengers on board.
7 She spent most of her life nursing seriously ill children in the hospital.
8 The two children were of an alike age.
9 We were unsure which way to go.
 10 The sorry girls apologised to their teacher for their behaviour.
66.2  Complete each pair of sentences using one pair of adjectives from the box. If an adjective 
can be used in both sentences, write it in both; if not, write it only in one. (Use a dictionary if 
necessary.) C
domestic – unsafe        educational – entertaining        
inevitable – utter        legal – stupid        serious – underlying
1 a  The experiment was a / an  failure.
 b After Dr Owen left the project, its failure was  .
2 a None of the equipment in the warehouse is  .
 b  The shop doesn’t sell  equipment.
3 a The trip to the wildlife park was a / an  experience.
 b The toys were  and the children played with them for hours.
4 a  The computer fault was  enough to disrupt all the work in the ofﬁ ce.
 b  The  problem has not yet been solved.
5 a  He was involved in a  argument with his neighbour over a tree in the 
garden.
 b It’s completely  to charge a fee for entry into the museum.
66.3  Write the word in brackets in one of the spaces in each sentence, either before or after the 
noun (or both if possible). (Use a dictionary if necessary.) D
1 The party was excellent, and I’d like to thank all the  people  . 
(concerned)
2 As the  minister  for the health service, I think he should resign. 
(responsible)
3 The new machinery was intended to increase output, but it seems to have had the  
effect  . (opposite)
4 Children are only admitted when accompanied by a / an  adult  . 
(responsible)
5 It’s the only  room  in the hotel that night. (available)
6 The pond on the village green was ﬁ lled in with the  approval  of local 
residents. (apparent)
7 Cars drive too fast past the school and  parents  have complained to 
the police. (concerned)
8 For those who need it, there is  ﬁ nancial advice  . (available)
66
Unit
A
B
Gradable and non-gradable adjectives 1
The adverbs fairly (= to quite a large degree, but usually less than ‘very’), really (= ‘very [much]’) and 
pretty (= similar to ‘fairly’; used in informal contexts) are commonly used with both gradable and 
non-gradable adjectives:
 She’s fairly popular at school.   It was a fairly awful ﬁ lm.
 I’m really busy at the moment.   The ﬂ  ooding was really terrible. 
 It’s a pretty important exam.   The bill was pretty huge.
However, note that we don’t generally use fairly (or very) with gradable adjectives which indicate 
that something is very good or necessary:
 Experience is really / pretty essential for the job. (not … fairly essential …)
 The weather was really / pretty perfect. (not … fairly perfect.)
Also: invaluable, superb, tremendous, wonderful
Gradable adjectives can be used with grading adverbs such as very or extremely to say that a thing or 
person has more or less of a particular quality. Here are some examples of adjectives used as gradable 
in their most common meanings:
Grading 
adverbs +
Gradable 
adjectives
 She was extremely rich.  The people there are reasonably friendly.
 It’s hugely popular.   They’re slightly different.
Non-gradable adjectives are not used with adverbs such as very or extremely because these 
adjectives do not refer to qualities which have different degrees. With non-gradable adjectives we 
can use non-grading adverbs which emphasise their extreme or absolute nature, such as absolutely, 
completely, etc. Many classifying adjectives (see Unit 66) are usually non-gradable. Adverbs such as 
almost, exclusively, etc., which indicate the extent of the quality, are commonly used with classifying 
adjectives. Here are some examples of non-gradable adjectives in their most common meanings:
Non- 
grading 
adverbs
+
Non- 
gradable 
adjectives
 She’s completely wrong.  It was absolutely superb.
 He was practically unknown to   The region is largely agricultural. 
the public.
Gradable adjectives are sometimes used with non-grading adverbs, and non-gradable adjectives with 
grading adverbs to give special emphasis or to be humorous:
 What you’re asking isn’t just difﬁ  cult – it’s extremely impossible! (grading adverb + 
non-gradable adjective)
 You’ve won a hundred pounds? Wow, you’re virtually rich! (non-grading adverb + gradable 
adjective)
Note that not all the adverbs can go with all the adjectives given in each of the tables above. For 
example, we can say ‘absolutely huge’, but we wouldn’t usually say ‘completely huge’ unless it was for 
particular emphasis or for humour.
134
67
a bit, dreadfully, extremely, 
hugely, immensely, intensely, 
rather, reasonably, slightly, very
absolutely, completely, entirely, 
perfectly, practically, simply, 
totally, utterly, virtually; 
almost, exclusively, fully, 
largely, mainly, nearly, primarily
angry, big, busy, clever, common, 
different, fast, friendly, happy, 
important, low, popular, quiet, 
rich, strong, weak, young
awful, excellent, huge, 
impossible, superb, terrible, 
unique, unknown, wrong; 
domestic, environmental, 
agricultural (see Unit 66C)
Unit
135
Exercises
67 . 1 Complete the four sentences which contain gradable adjectives using very. Complete the 
remaining sentences with the adverbs from the box. Try to use a different one each time. A
absolutely        almost        completely        exclusively        mainly        practically
1 The bridge is now  complete.
2 The material is  cotton.
3 The food was  excellent.
4 Her explanation was  clear.
5 Their actions were  illegal.
6 The new restaurant is  popular.
7 I was in a / an  permanent state of suspense.
8 I thought she was  attractive.
9 Until last year the club was  male.
 10 Small black cars are not  visible.
67 .2  Answer the questions using an adverb + adjective. A  How would you feel if …
1 … a friend said s/he had just won a million pounds? I’d be absolutely delighted.
2 … your best friend told you s/he was emigrating to Australia?
3 … someone broke a window in your house or ﬂ at?
4 … a complete stranger told you that you were very beautiful / handsome?
5 … you lost some airline tickets you had just bought?
67 .3  If necessary, correct the italicised parts of this email. If they are already correct, write ✓. A
67
67 .4  Cross out any incorrect or unlikely alternatives. B
1 Her advice was fairly / really invaluable.
2 Our neighbours are really / fairly friendly.
3 I thought his performance as Hamlet was fairly / really tremendous.
4 The children kept pretty / very quiet during the concert.
5 The view from the window was very / pretty wonderful.
6 Their cooperation is pretty / very essential if we want the project to go ahead.
7 The weather was really / fairly perfect for a long walk.
8 In this photograph she looked really / very young.
9 The workmanship in the furniture was pretty / very superb.
 10 The disease is fairly / pretty common in this part of the country.
Dear Nathan,
I’m writing this email in my new fl at in Stratford. It’s in an (1) absolutely old building which was (2) totally 
renovated last year. Fortunately, I didn’t have to do much decorating when I moved in. As you know, I’m 
(3) hugely useless at DIY so I was (4) absolutely happy about that. The building is (5) reasonably unique 
in this part of Stratford, as most others around are (6) rather modern, and the view across the river from 
my sitting room is (7) simply superb. The fl at’s (8) simply small, but (9) completely comfortable for me.
My neighbours are (10) very friendly and usually (11) fully quiet. The only problem is that the woman 
upstairs plays the trumpet and I fi  nd it (12) a bit impossible to read when she’s playing. I get (13) slightly 
angry about this, but she doesn’t play for long each time, so it’s not an (14) extremely terrible problem.
I know that the weather has been (15) dreadfully awful recently, so it’s been difficult for you to get here, but 
you must come over one evening. There’s an (16) absolutely marvellous restaurant nearby that we could 
go to.
Hope all is well,
Lea
Unit
A
B
Gradable and non-gradable adjectives 2
In spoken English in particular, we can use good and …, lovely and …, and nice and … followed by 
another gradable adjective in order to emphasise the second adjective. Possible patterns include – 
 good and ready and more colloquially good and proper / relaxed / strong (but not usually good 
and beautiful / rich / tall):
 If you’re all feeling good and relaxed after the break, let’s get on with the meeting.
 lovely and dry / soft / sunny / warm (but not usually lovely and decent / empty /  short):
 It’s lovely and warm in here. Freezing outside, though.
 nice and bright / clean / cold / comfortable / early / fresh / quiet / simple /  soft / tidy / 
warm (but not usually nice and interesting / handsome / exciting):
 ‘Shall we get some strawberries?’ ‘Yes, they look nice and fresh.’
We can also link comparative adjectives (see Unit 72) with and to talk about an increasing degree of 
the quality described in the adjective. We use more and more + adjective in a similar way:
 As she got more and more excited, her voice got higher and higher and louder and louder.
 The taxi driver just drove faster and faster and faster until I told him to stop, and I got out.
Some adjectives have both gradable and non-gradable senses.
(i) Some adjectives have different senses when they are gradable and non-gradable. Compare:
 Smith is a very common name. (= frequently found; gradable) and
 We have a lot of common interests. (= shared; non-gradable; not very) 
 The house is very old. (= existed many years; gradable) and
 I met my old politics professor the other day. (= former; non-gradable; not very) 
Also: civil, clean, critical, electric (= ‘exciting’ when gradable), 
empty, false, late, odd, original, particular, straight
(ii) Some adjectives have similar meanings when they are gradable and non-gradable. However, 
when they are gradable we talk about the quality that a person or thing has (i.e. they are qualitative 
adjectives and therefore can be used with an adverb), and when they are non-gradable we talk about 
the category or type they belong to (i.e. they are classifying adjectives). Compare:
 I don’t know where he came from, but he sounded slightly foreign. (= not from this country; 
gradable) and
 She is now advising on the government’s foreign policy. (= concerning other countries; non-
gradable)
 They had a very public argument. (= seen / heard by a lot of people; gradable) and
 He was forced to resign by public pressure. (= from many people in the community; non- 
gradable)
Also: academic, adult, average, diplomatic, genuine, guilty, human, individual, 
innocent, mobile, private, professional, scientiﬁ c, technical, true, wild
136
68

Unit
137
Exercises
68. 1  Complete the sentences using each of the adjectives from the box twice, once with a gradable 
sense (adding very) and once with a non-gradable sense. (Use a dictionary if necessary.) Ai
critical        false        late        original        straight
1  The novel was praised by the judges for its very original  use of language.
2 The train is  again. I wonder if the bad weather has delayed it.
3 The report was  of the police ofﬁ cers involved in the investigation.
4 I had a / an  choice between working for my father and having no job at all.
5 She was accused of giving  information during the trial.
6 The driver of the overturned lorry was in a / an  condition in hospital last night.
7 I was given the oil painting by my  uncle Simon.
8 The  ﬁ replaces had been removed and replaced by more modern ones.
9 The path to the summit of the hill was  and steep.
 10 Many of the people I met were quite sincere, but some seemed  , so that I could 
never be sure if they meant what they said.
68.2  Complete each pair of sentences using the adverb + adjective pairs from the box. Use the 
adjective in both sentences, but include the adverb in only one. Aii
(largely) academic           (fairly) average           (extremely) diplomatic
(very) human          (intensely) private          (highly) technical
1 a The average  temperature on the island is a pleasant 23.4 °C.
 b Brecston is a /  an  fairly average  town in the south of England.
2 a The instructions were  and clearly meant for an expert.
 b Fiona got a job providing  support for people having computer problems.
3 a  Being frightened in this situation is a  response and nothing to be 
ashamed of.
 b   Near the top of the mountain there were signs of  habitation, perhaps 
centuries old.
4 a I found it difﬁ  cult to understand the  talk that Professor Downs gave.
  b The  standards at the school are very high.
5 a He worked hard to afford a  education for his three children. 
 b She was a / an  person and had few close friends.
6 a  After Mara left university she worked in the  service for a number of 
years.
 b  When he was asked to comment on the French President’s decision he gave a / an 
 answer, not wanting to appear critical.
68.3  Complete the sentences with phrases beginning with good / lovely / nice + and + an 
appropriate adjective. B
1 Now that the room is painted yellow, it looks lovely and bright.  
2 I’ve put you in the spare room at the back of the house, so it’ll be  .
3 A: Have you felt the material my new coat’s made of?   B: Oh, it’s  .
4 The oranges looked quite old, but when I cut into them they were  .
5 There’s no point in trying to persuade Gustavo. He won’t make up his mind until he’s 
 .
68
Unit
A
B
C
Participle adjectives and compound adjectives
In formal English, that and those can be used as pronouns before a participle 
adjective:
 The ﬂ  our is of a higher quality than that produced by other varieties of wheat. (= the ﬂ our 
which is produced)
 The touchscreens perform less well than those manufactured elsewhere. (= the touchscreens 
which are manufactured elsewhere)
 Here is some advice for those (= people) preparing to go on holiday.
We can use many participle adjectives immediately after nouns when they identify or deﬁ ne the noun. 
This use is similar to deﬁ ning relative clauses and they are often called ‘reduced relatives’:
 We had to pay for the rooms used. (or ... the rooms that were used.)
Some of these are rarely used before the noun:
 My watch was among the things taken. 
(but not ... the taken things. )
Others can be used before or immediately after nouns:
 The crowd watching grew restless. or   
 The watching crowd grew restless.
Participle adjectives
Some -ing forms (present participles) and -ed forms (past participles) of verbs can be used as 
adjectives. Most of these participle adjectives can be used before the noun they describe or following 
linking verbs (see Unit 21):
 The hotel had a welcoming atmosphere.
 I found this broken plate in the kitchen cupboard.
 The students’ tests results were pleasing.
 My mother seemed delighted with the present.
138
69
Also: applying, caused, found, included, provided
Also: affected, alleged, allocated, broken, 
chosen, identiﬁ ed, infected, interested, 
remaining, resulting, stolen
D Compound adjectives
Many compound adjectives include a participle adjective. Common patterns are:
adverb + -ed participle   They are well-behaved children.
adverb + -ing participle   Social networking is a fast-growing activity.
adjective + -ed participle   She seems to live on ready-made meals. 
adjective + -ing participle   He’s the longest-serving employee in the company. 
noun + -ed participle   The public square was tree-lined.
noun + -ing participle   I hope it will be a money-making enterprise.
-ed participle + particle   Did it really happen, or was it a made-up story? (from two-word verbs)
We can use some participle adjectives 
only in adjective compounds. For example, 
we can’t say ‘... behaved children’ or ‘... a 
making enterprise’ as the sense is 
incomplete without the adverb or noun.
Also: New York-based, Paris-born, brick-built, 
easy-going, peace-keeping, long-lasting, good-
looking, home-made, hair-raising, far-reaching, 
well-resourced, sweet-smelling, strange-sounding, 
soft-spoken, sour-tasting, nerve-wracking
Note that many other compound adjectives do not include participle adjectives: 
 The problem is short-term.  It was just a small-scale project.
conventionally
grown
Organic
30% more
vitamin C
Fuel efficiency
of cars
1990 Today
average
citizen
president:
salary x 25
Unit
139
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 13 (page 248)
69. 1  Replace the italicised parts of these sentences with present or past participle adjectives formed 
from the verbs in the box. Give alternative positions for the adjective if possible. B
 cause         identify        include        interest        provide        remain        result
1 I offered to pay for any damage that was the result. caused  (not … any caused damage.)
2 Steps are being taken by telephone engineers to solve the problems which have been noticed.
3  Visitors who want to ﬁ nd out more can buy a booklet with further information.
4 Please answer the questions on the sheet that has been given to you.
5 The holiday cost £1,200, with ﬂ ights which were part of the total.
6 I didn’t want to be on TV but the publicity that was the consequence was good for business.
7 Just before serving the pasta, sprinkle over any cheese that is left over.
69.2  Write a sentence to describe each set of information using either that or those followed by one 
of the participle adjectives from the box. C
earned        found        grown        manufactured         recorded 
1 
69
 Average temperatures in June and July 2012 were higher than those recorded in  
June and July 2002.  (or … in the corresponding months in 2002. ).
2 
3 
4 
5 
69.3  Complete each second sentence using a compound adjective from D to replace the italicised 
information in each ﬁ rst sentence. D
1 The company is organised from New York. It is a New York-based  company.
2 The school has all the things it needs, with sufﬁ cient books and computers. The school is 
 , with sufﬁ cient books and computers.
3 I found that the whole experience made me tense and worried. I found the whole experience 
 .
4 The proposed changes will have a major inﬂ uence on a large number of people. The proposed 
changes will be  .
69.4  Match the words to form compound adjectives and use them to rewrite the italicised parts of 
these sentences. D
clean        eye         ill         wide         catching         equipped         ranging        shaven
1 At the age of 16 children do not have the ability or experience to take on the role of parents.
are ill-equipped  .
2 The discussions dealt with a great variety of topics.  
3 When I last saw him he had a beard, but now he has no beard.  
4 The advertisements for the new car are very noticeable.  
Average
temperature10
2002
June
15
20
25
July
2012
June July
Unit
A
B
Adjective + to-inﬁ nitive, -ing, that-clause, 
wh-clause
It + linking verb + adjective 
We can sometimes use it + linking verb + adjective + to-inﬁ nitive as an alternative to subject + 
linking verb + adjective + to-inﬁ nitive (see also Units 96 and 97):
 The ﬁ  reworks were amazing to watch. or 
 It was amazing to watch the ﬁ reworks. 
When an adjective comes after a linking verb (e.g. appear, be, become, seem; see Unit 21) we can use 
a number of patterns after the adjective including a to-inﬁ nitive, -ing, that-clause, and wh-clause. 
(For It + linking verb + adjective, see B.)
adjective + example adjectives used in this pattern
i to-inﬁ nitive
 You’re free to leave at any time 
you want.
(un)able, careful, crazy, curious, difﬁ cult, easy, 
foolish, free, good, hard, impossible, inclined, mad, 
nice, prepared, ready, stupid, welcome, willing
ii -ing
 He was busy doing his homework.
busy, crazy, foolish, mad, stupid; (after the verb 
feel) awful, awkward, bad, good, guilty, terrible
iii that-clause
 He became worried (that) she 
might fall down.
afraid, alarmed, amazed, angry, annoyed, ashamed, 
astonished, aware, concerned, disappointed, glad, 
(un)happy, pleased, shocked, sorry, upset, worried; 
certain, conﬁ dent, positive, sure
iv wh-clause
 I’m not certain (of /  about) why
he wants to borrow the money
afraid, not aware / unaware, not certain /  
uncertain, doubtful, not sure / unsure, worried
v to-inﬁ nitive or that-clause
 She was afraid to say anything.
 I was afraid that I would be late.
the adjectives in (iii) above, except aware, conﬁ dent 
and positive
vi to-inﬁ nitive or -ing
 He’d be stupid to leave now. 
 He’d be stupid giving up the job.
crazy, foolish, mad, stupid
vii -ing or that-clause
 She felt awful leaving him with all 
the clearing up.
 She felt awful that she was late.
(after the verb feel) awful, awkward, bad, good, 
guilty, terrible
140
70
Also: annoying, awkward, easy, good, 
interesting, lovely, simple, terriﬁ c, wonderful
In informal speech we can use an -ing form instead of a to-inﬁ nitive:
 It is easy understanding her.  It was amazing watching the ﬁ reworks. 
We can use a similar pattern with adjective + wh- or that-clause (see Unit 96A):
 It is not clear why he did it.   It was odd that she left so suddenly. 
After certain adjectives we often include of + subject between the adjective and a to-inﬁ nitive:
 It was rude (of them) to criticise her. or 
 They were rude to criticise her. Also: brave, generous, kind, mean, 
thoughtful, unprofessional, unreasonable
When we talk about how somebody reacts to a situation we can use it + make with an adjective and 
to-inﬁ nitive, -ing or that-clause:
 It made me angry (to discover) that so 
much money was wasted. (or It made 
me angry discovering that ... or I was 
angry to discover that ...)
Also: ashamed, furious, glad, happy, 
miserable, nervous, sad, tired, uncomfortable
Unit
141
Exercises
 70
70. 1  Complete the sentences with a to-inﬁ nitive or an -ing form of the verbs in the box. 
Give alternatives where possible. A
cheat        know        leave        open        panic        reduce        
resign        talk        turn        underestimate
1 I’m afraid I can’t afford that much. Would you be prepared  the price if I pay cash?
2 Kenzo was stupid  in the exam. He was bound to get caught.
3 He felt good  that he had helped solve the problem.
4 Don’t feel that you need to stay to the very end. You’re free  at any time.
5 Anyone trying to climb the mountain would be foolish  the challenge facing them.
6 People said I was crazy  a shop in the village, but it’s been a success so far.
7 She was too busy  on the phone to notice that Roya had come into the room.
8 It’s so difﬁ cult to get a job at the moment you’d be mad  .
9 Some people would be inclined  if they smelt smoke in the house.
 10 I felt awful  people away from the concert, but there just wasn’t any more room.
70.2  Correct any mistakes in the italicised parts of this email about a holiday in Thailand. A
70.3  Rewrite these sentences using It + be + adjective. If possible, use of + a personal pronoun 
after the adjective. B
1 She was brave to spend the night in the old house alone. It was brave of her to spend 
the night in the old house alone.
2 Such a magniﬁ cent performance was wonderful to hear.
3 You were mean to eat all the cake and not leave any for me.
4 They were unreasonable to complain about the exam results.
5 The top of the jar was awkward to get off.
6 The shelves were simple to put up.
7 He was unprofessional to criticise the headteacher in front of the staff.
8 You were kind to give birthday presents to the children.
70.4  Complete these sentences with It made me + any appropriate adjective. B
1 It made me angry  to hear how she had been insulted.
2  listening to his lies.
3  that we wouldn’t be working together again.
4  to learn how badly we treated immigrants in the 1950s.
5  hearing the dentist’s drill as I sat in the waiting room.
… After a couple of days Mark announced that he was going walking in the hills near the hotel. I 
thought he was (1) stupid that he would go alone and that it was dangerous. But he said that he was 
(2) conﬁ dent not to get lost. We ended up arguing and ﬁ nally he stormed off, saying he (3) wasn’t 
sure when he’d be back. I went into town, but I felt a bit (4) guilty to shop all day. On the bus on the 
way back to the hotel I got talking to a local woman and (5) was concerned learning that it got very 
cold in the hills at night. I started (6) to get worried that he might be in danger, but I (7) wasn’t 
certain what to do. But when I got back to the hotel, there was Mark (8) busy to drink orange juice 
by the pool. He’d decided not to go walking after all! He said he (9) was sorry upsetting me. At ﬁ rst 
I was angry and said he was stubborn and that he just (10) wasn’t prepared admitting that I’d been 
right. But really I was just (11) pleased that he was safe …
Unit
A
B
C
Adjectives and adverbs
Some adverbs have different meanings with and without -ly. Compare:
 She gave her time free. (= for no money) and She gave her time freely. (= willingly)
 I arrived late for the concert. (= not on time) and I haven’t seen Amy lately. (= recently)
Compare also:
 He wandered deep into the forest and got 
lost. (= a long way)
 He felt deeply hurt by her criticisms. (= very)
 They loved each other deeply. (= very much)
 You don’t have to change trains. You can go 
direct. (= without stopping)
 I’ll be with you directly. (= very soon)
 He saw Hassan directly ahead. (= straight)
 It sounded awful – one of the choir 
members was singing ﬂ at.
 This time I ﬂ atly refused to lend him any 
money. (= deﬁ nitely; completely)
 He kicked the ball high over the goal.  Everyone thinks highly of her teaching. 
(= they think her teaching is very good)
 ‘Is Emil here yet?’ ‘He’s just arrived.’
 She looks just like her mother.
 You can be justly proud of your musical 
achievements. (= rightly; justiﬁ ably)
 Which of these cheeses do you like most?  Her novels are now mostly out of print. 
(= most of them)
 We mostly go on holiday to France. 
(= usually)
 They cut short their holiday when
 Lina fell ill. (= went home early)
 The speaker will be arriving shortly 
(= soon). Please take your seats.
 The door was wide open so I just went 
straight in. (= completely)
 You won’t have any problems getting the 
book. It’s widely available. (= in many places)
Some adverbs have two forms, one ending in -ly and the other not. We can sometimes use either form 
without changing the meaning, although the form ending in -ly is grammatically correct and more formal:
 She ran quick / quickly towards the door. 
and must be used if the adverb comes immediately 
before the verb:
 She quickly ran towards the door. (not She quick ran ...)
Some adverbs of manner (saying how something is done) are formed from an 
adjective + -ly: sudden → suddenly, happy → happily, etc. When an adjective 
already ends in -ly (e.g. cowardly, elderly, friendly, kindly, lively, lonely, lovely) we don’t add -ly 
to it to make an adverb. Instead we can use a prepositional phrase with fashion, manner, or way:
 He smiled at me in a friendly way.
 She waved her hands around in a lively fashion.
Most participle adjectives ending in -ed (see Unit 69) don’t have an adverb form and so we use a 
prepositional phrase instead:
 They rose to greet me in a subdued manner. (not … subduedly.)
or we use a preposition and a related noun if there is one:
 She looked at me in amazement. (not … amazedly.)
However, some do have an adverb form with -ly. Compare:
 The storm was unexpected. and
 The weather turned unexpectedly 
stormy. 
142
71
Also: agitatedly, allegedly, deservedly, 
determinedly, disappointedly, excitedly, 
hurriedly, pointedly, repeatedly, reportedly, 
reputedly, supposedly, worriedly 
Also: cheap(ly), clean(ly), clear(ly), 
ﬁ ne(ly), loud(ly), thin(ly), slow(ly)
Reminder ➜ L5–L6
Unit
143
Exercises
 71
71. 1  Rewrite the italicised words using a -ly form of the participles in the box. If a -ly form isn’t 
possible, use a prepositional phrase or a preposition + related noun. A
agitated        anticipated        despaired        determined        disappointed
organised        relaxed        repeated        reputed        satisﬁ ed
1 I warned him again and again of the dangers on the mountain, but he insisted on going on.
2 The class was out of control and he put his head in his hands feeling that he could do nothing.
3 As his mother took the roast chicken out of the oven, Rod licked his lips because he was looking 
forward to eating it.
4 It is said to be, although no one knows for certain, the smallest post ofﬁ ce in the country.
5 ‘Still no news from Paul,’ she said in a sad way.
6 He ran the company in a calm way and rarely let anything annoy him.
7 She shook her head as if she had made a ﬁ rm decision.
8 When he had ﬁ nished the painting, he looked at it in a way that showed he was happy.
9 Vicky runs the ofﬁ ce carefully and tidily, so I don’t think we should change things now.
 10 Soﬁ  a paced about in an anxious way as she waited to go into the interview.
71.2  Complete the sentences with suitable pairs of adverbs from C. Use the form with -ly in one 
sentence and the form without -ly in the other. C
1 a What she hated  was having to get up at 5:30 every morning.
 b We don’t go out much in the evening. We  watch television.
2 a The ﬁ  rm paid compensation, but stopped  of admitting they were to blame.
 b The book is due to be published  .
3 a  I’m not in my ofﬁ  ce at the moment, but if you leave your name and number I’ll get back to 
you  . [Message on a telephone answering machine]
 b I used to have to change in Amsterdam to get to Moscow, but now I can ﬂ  y  .
4 a I got very little sleep on the ﬂ  ight, but I felt  awake when I arrived in Tokyo.
 b French is  spoken in North Africa.
5 a She is one of the most  regarded researchers in the university.
 b We could just see the plane ﬂ  ying  overhead.
71.3  Correct any mistakes in these sentences. If there are no mistakes, write ✓.  A–C
1 The rise in car crime in the area is deeply worrying.
2 She waved friendlily to me.
3 Cut the onions up ﬁ nely and fry them with garlic.
4 I asked the boys to move their bicycles off the football pitch but they ﬂ at refused.
5 I couldn’t understand what he was saying. He didn’t speak very clearly.
6 He was accused of behaving cowardlily in the battle.
7 Pierre Evene manufactured the glass for which the town became just renowned.
8 I called Elena and she slow turned to face me.
9 Spread some butter on the bread as thin as possible.
 10 The prime minister was loud applauded by her audience.
Unit
A
B
C
D
Adjectives and adverbs: comparative and 
superlative forms
Superlatives
We usually use the, a possessive form (with -’s), or a possessive pronoun before a superlative adjective 
or adverb. In informal contexts we sometimes leave out the before an -est or most + adjective 
superlative after a linking verb, particularly at the end of a sentence:
 ‘Why did you go by bus?’ ‘It was ( the) cheapest.’
 Which was ( the) most expensive?
However, we can’t leave out the when we go on to say what group of things is being compared:
 ‘Why did you buy these oranges?’ ‘They were the cheapest ones I could ﬁ nd.’ (not They were 
cheapest ones …)
When most + adjective / adverb is used without the, most means something like ‘very’:
 I checked the form most carefully (= very carefully) but didn’t notice the mistake.
After a superlative we use of + a plural noun phrase to name the objects being compared:
 Adam’s the oldest of my three brothers.
Note that we can put the of-phrase at the beginning to emphasise it:
 Of my three brothers, Adam’s the oldest.
When we give the location or context within which the comparison is made we usually use in + a 
singular noun phrase:
 It was the tallest tree in the forest. (not … the tallest tree of the forest.)
Some adjectives with two syllables are most commonly used with more / less, particularly:
 participle adjectives (e.g. worried, boring)
 adjectives ending in -ful and -less (e.g. careful, careless)
 afraid, alert, alike, alone, ashamed, aware
 some other adjectives, including active, cautious, certain, complex, direct, eager, exact, 
formal, frequent, modern, special, recent 
Most two-syllable adjectives ending -y, -ow, -er and -ure can take either an -er or the more + 
adjective form, although the -er form is more frequently used.
Some adjectives (e.g. complete, equal, favourite, ideal, perfect, unique) have a comparative or 
superlative meaning so are not often used with -er / more / less or –est / most / least. However, we 
can use comparative or superlative forms for special emphasis:
 The weather today was good, but less perfect than yesterday.
Comparatives: -er vs more / less … than 
We usually add -er to one-syllable adjectives and adverbs to make their comparative form.
However, we use more + adjective –
 with one-syllable past participle adjectives (see Unit 69) such as bored, creased, pleased, worn:
 After I’d ironed my shirt it looked more creased than before. (not … creaseder …)
 with fun, real, right and wrong:
 I expected the ﬁ  lm to be rather dull, but I couldn’t have been more wrong. (not … wronger.)
 when we are comparing two qualities:
 ‘Wasn’t he brave to swim across?’ ‘I think he was more mad than brave.’
 Although the paint was called ‘Sky Blue’, I thought it was more green than blue.
We can also use ‘… he wasn’t so much brave as mad’ and ‘… it was blue rather than green’.
We can sometimes use more as an alternative to the -er form to emphasise the comparison:
 You might think it’s dark here but it’s more dark in the cellar. (or … darker …)
Also: clear, cold, deep, fair, rough, soft, true.
144
72
Reminder ➜ L7–L8
Unit
145
Exercises
 72
72. 1  Complete the sentences with a comparative adjective from the box, using an -er or more + 
adjective form. Use both if possible. A
deep        hard        long        naughty        pretty        scared        strong        true
1 It was almost as if the wolf was  of us than we were of it.
2 The river was  than I expected so I decided to turn back.
3 I think I’d describe her as  than beautiful.
4 I bought this tennis racket because it’s  .
5 Sam isn’t a bad boy really. He’s  than dishonest.
6 The exam was  than I thought it would be.
7 We need to take responsibility for elderly neighbours, and in a cold winter like this it is 
 than ever.
8 We took the  path up the hill as the other one was very steep.
72.2  If necessary, correct or improve the comparative adjectives. B
1 I may not be much of a cook, but Nina is even  uselesser  in the kitchen than I am. 
more useless
2  When I took the washing out of the machine it looked dirtier than when it went in. 
3 A: The painting is from the 17th century.   
 B: Really? It looks recenter than that. 
4 The ﬁ lm starts slowly, but gets excitinger after the ﬁ rst half hour. 
5  Louis is already rich, but his aim in life seems to be to become even more wealthy. 
6  All of us are unique, but some of us are more unique than others. 
7 Most research in this area uses simple interviews, but we used a complexer methodology. 
8 I didn’t do well at school, and my fellow students all seemed cleverer than me. 
9 For an extra $500 you could buy a much powerfuler motorbike.
 10 Curiously, many people say they feel mentally alerter if they eat very little for a day. 
72.3  Put brackets around the if it can be omitted in these sentences. C
1 It was the sweetest orange I’d eaten for ages.
2 Anna, Beth and Clara were all excellent musicians, but Clara was the most creative.
3 He’s the fastest runner in his class.
4 We get lots of birds in our garden, but blackbirds are the most common.
5 A: Shall we go by train, bus or car?   
 B: Well, going by bus is actually the easiest.
72.4  Complete the sentences with in or of. D
1 The building is said to be the highest  Europe.
2 The Democrats are the smallest  the four main political parties.
3 Parmesan is perhaps the most famous  all Italian cheeses. 
4 For many people, it is the most important day  the whole year.
5 She’s without doubt the best swimmer  my school.

Unit
A
B
C
D
E
F
Comparative phrases and clauses
We also use as much / many as or as little / few as to say that a quantity or amount is larger or 
smaller than expected. Many and few are preferred before numbers; much and little are preferred 
with amounts (e.g. $5, 20%) and distances (e.g. 3 metres):
 There are a small number of people involved, possibly as few as twenty.
 Prices have increased by as much as 300%.
We can use not + adjective / adverb + enough + to-inﬁ nitive to mean that there isn’t as much as is 
necessary to do something:
 I’m not tall enough to reach.  He didn’t speak loudly enough to be heard.
We can use sufﬁ ciently before adjectives to express a similar meaning to enough. Sufﬁ ciently is 
often preferred in more formal contexts:
 She didn’t play sufﬁ ciently well to qualify. (or … well enough to qualify.)
We can use too + adjective / adverb + to-inﬁ nitive to mean ‘more than necessary, possible, etc.’ to 
do something:
 They arrived too late to get seats.  It moved too fast to see it clearly.
 The suitcase was too small (for him) to get all his clothes in.
In rather formal English we can use too + adjective + a / an + noun:
 I hope you haven’t had too tiring a day. (not … a too tiring day.)
(In a less formal style we might say ‘I hope your day hasn’t been too tiring.’)
We can use so + adjective / adverb + that-clause to say that something existed or happened to such 
a degree that a speciﬁ ed result occurred (see also Unit 81):
 It’s so simple that even I can do it.    He came in so quietly that I didn’t hear him.
Less often we use so + adjective / adverb + as + to-inﬁ nitive with a similar meaning. Compare:
 The difference was so small that it wasn’t worth arguing about. and
 The difference was so small as to not be worth arguing about. (= Because the difference was 
so small, it wasn’t worth arguing about)
We can use go so / as far as + to-inﬁ nitive to talk about actions that are surprising or extreme:
 One furious woman went so / as far as to throw tomatoes at the minister.
If we put a singular countable noun between an adjective and the second as, we use a / an in front of 
the noun:
 Despite his disability, he tried to lead as normal a life as possible. (not … as normal life as …)
The negative form of sentences like this can use either not as or sometimes not such:
 It’s not as quiet a place (or ... not such a quiet place …) as it used to be.
Note that we use not as + adjective + a / an + noun but not such a / an + adjective + noun.
We can use so, too and how followed by an adjective in a similar way:
 It’s not quite so straightforward a problem as it might at ﬁ rst seem.
 ‘Conspiracy’ is perhaps too strong a word.   How big a piece do you want?
We use as + adjective / adverb + as to say that something or someone is like something or someone 
else, or that one situation is like another:
 Was the ﬁ  lm as funny as his last one?  I came round as quickly as I could.
Negative forms of sentences like this can use either not as or not so. In formal speech and writing it is 
more common to use less + adjective + than:
 The gap between the sides is not as / so wide as it was. (or … is less wide than it was.)
146
73
Unit
147
Exercises
 73
73. 1  Complete these sentences with as … as or not as / such … as (or both if possible). Use the 
words in brackets and add any other necessary words. B
1 It’s not such a polluted city now as / not as polluted a city now as  it was 
ten years ago. (not / polluted / city now)
2 The Downtown Hotel is  Strand Hotel. 
 ( not / pleasant / place to stay)
3 The President’s address to the nation is  
he is ever likely to make in his career. (important / speech)
4 It was  
I ﬁ rst thought. (not / big / problem)
5 Theresa’s dog is  
I’ve ever seen. (ferocious / animal)
6 She’s  
she claims to be. (not / ﬂ uent / Greek speaker)
73.2  Complete these sentences with as much as, as many as, as little as, or as few as. C
1 When it was really hot I was having  four showers a day.
2 The elephant population may soon fall to  1,000 from 5,000 ten years ago.
3 At the end of the 200-metre race there was  50 metres between the ﬁ rst 
and second runners.
4  5,000 people phoned in to complain about last night’s TV programme.
5 Lit continuously, the life of a light bulb varies from  two weeks to three 
months.
6 Some days there were  three or four students at his lectures.
7 We don’t use much electricity. Sometimes our bill is  £40 a month.
8 The country spends  25% of its income on defence.
73.3  Join the sentences using so + adjective + as + to-inﬁ nitive. F
1 The noise from the factory was loud. 
2 Her handwriting was untidy. 
3 The bookcase was heavy. 
4 The CD was badly scratched. 
5 The plot of the novel was complicated.
6 The difference between the results was small. 
a  It was nearly illegible.
b  It was insigniﬁ cant.
c  It was unplayable.
d  It prevented me sleeping. 
e  It was almost impossible to move it.
f  It was completely incomprehensible.
1 + d The noise from the factory was so loud as to prevent me sleeping.   
73.4  Correct any mistakes in the italicised parts of this interview with a football manager. A–F
INTERVIEWER:   (1) How serious injury is it? Is it (2) so serious as has been claimed in the newspapers? 
Some people are saying Franz Kahn will never play international football again.
MANAGER:  Well, it’s certainly (3) enough bad to keep him out of football for at least six months. 
He’s obviously (4) not so ﬁ t as he used to be and even he would admit that he’s (5) 
not such good player as he was in his twenties. But I wouldn’t (6) go so far to say that 
he’ll never play for the national team again. I know him (7) sufﬁ ciently well enough 
to say that he will consider his future carefully before making any major decisions.
INTERVIEWER:  Well, we all wish him (8) as speedy recovery as possible …
Unit
A
B
C
D
E
Position of adverbs 1
We avoid putting an adverb between a main verb and a following -ing form or to-inﬁ nitive:
 He began running quickly. or He quickly began running. (not He began quickly running.)
 She tried to leave quietly. or She quietly tried to leave. (not She tried quietly to leave.)
The position of the adverb can change the meaning of the sentence (see Unit 75A). Compare:
 I recall telling him clearly that he had won. (= I told him clearly; ‘clearly’ modiﬁ es ‘telling 
him’) and
 I clearly recall telling him that he had won. (= I clearly recall it; ‘clearly’ modiﬁ es ‘recall’.)
‘I recall clearly telling him that he had won’ is also possible, but is ambiguous; it can have either of 
the two meanings given above. In speech, the meaning intended is usually signalled by intonation.
When there is more than one adverbial in end position, the usual order in written English is adverbial 
of manner (= saying how something is done), place, and then time:
 In the accident she was thrown violently forwards. (= manner + place)
 We arrived here on Saturday. (= place + time)
For special emphasis we can move an adverbial to the end:
 In the accident she was thrown forwards, violently.
If one adverbial is much longer than another then it is usually placed last:
 They left at three with a great deal of noise. (= time + manner)
An adverb usually comes before a prepositional phrase when these have the same function (i.e. when 
they both describe manner, or place, or time):
 She went downstairs to the cellar. (= place + place)
End position is usual for many adverbials of place, deﬁ nite frequency, and deﬁ nite time:
 They live upstairs. (not They upstairs live.)
 She goes weekly. (not She weekly goes.)
 Have you heard the good news? Eva had a baby in May. (not Eva in May had a baby.)
However, adverbs of indeﬁ nite time usually go in mid position (see Unit 75).
Note that in journalism, other adverbs of time are often used in mid position, where we would 
normally place them in end (or front) position:
 The government yesterday announced an increase in education spending.
End position
In end position, we usually put an adverb after an object rather than immediately after the verb:
 We considered the problem brieﬂ y. (not We considered brieﬂ y the problem.) 
However, if an object is very long other positions are possible:
 We considered brieﬂ y the long-term solution to the problem. (or We brieﬂ y considered …)
There are three main positions for adverbs which modify a verb: end, front and mid position – 
 In end position, the adverb comes after the 
verb – either immediately after it or later in 
the clause.
 They played quietly all day.  
 He tried to leave quietly.   
 He sat in the corner quietly. 
 In front position the adverb comes before 
the subject.
 Finally he could stand the noise no longer.  
 Sometimes I feel like leaving. 
 In mid position the adverb comes between 
the subject and verb, immediately after be as 
a main verb, or after the ﬁ rst auxiliary verb.
 He usually plays better than this.
 She is usually here by ten.
 They would usually come by car. 
Many adverbs can go in any of these positions, depending on context or style. For example:
 He turned round slowly. (end)             Slowly he turned round. (front)
 He slowly turned round. (mid)
148
74
Unit
149
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 13 (page 248)
74.1  Put the adverb in brackets in an appropriate position in each sentence. In some cases both 
positions are possible. C
1 I  expect Catalina to win the race  . (easily)
2 He  regretted missing the concert  . (greatly)
3 I  hated playing the piano  , although my parents thought I loved it. 
(secretly)
4 He  started to walk  across the bridge over the gorge. (calmly)
5 She  offered to do the work  . (kindly)
6 Bruno  ﬁ nished speaking  and sat down. (hurriedly)
7 I  don’t remember putting it down  . (simply)
8 We  look forward to hearing from you  . (soon)
9 They  tried to ignore me  (deliberately)
 10 I don’t  pretend to understand the instructions  . (completely)
74.2  Complete this email using the words and phrases from the box below in the correct order. 
B & D
74
1  in July / around Switzerland  2 a car / at the airport
3 towards the lakes / south
4 in a beautiful cottage belonging to some friends of Kim’s mother / for a week
5 early / at about six o’clock
6 in the village where Kim had spent some time when she was a student / brieﬂ y
7 carefully / on the narrow winding roads 8 home / the train
9 in Switzerland / enormously / ourselves 10 before too long / there
74.3  If necessary, rewrite these sentences putting the italicised word or phrase in a more appropriate 
position. If the sentence is already correct, write ✓. B–E
1 I try to visit every week my parents. I try to visit my parents every week.  / 
Every week I try to visit my parents.
2 Next, beat the eggs vigorously in a small bowl.
3 I thought I’d locked securely the luggage.
4 I stopped regularly playing tennis after I broke my wrist.
5 Lee was easily beaten in the ﬁ nal.
6 Matias never eats in the canteen at work. He always brings from home sandwiches.
7 A: Do the Patel family still live next door?   B: No, they moved last year away.
8 The local residents welcomed the decision to introduce a new bus service from their village into 
the nearby town warmly.
9 We have to hand the homework in on Tuesday.
We had a great time driving (1) around Switzerland in July :HÀHZLQWR=XULFKDQGKLUHG
(2) :HGURYH  , 
and stayed (4) (YHU\PRUQLQJ
ZHJRWXS DQGZHQWGRZQ
WRWKHQHDUE\ODNHIRUDVZLP±IUHH]LQJEXWZRQGHUIXO7KHQH[WZHHNZHGURYHHDVWDQGVWD\HG
(6) ,W¶VLQDVSHFWDFXODUSDUW
RIWKHFRXQWU\EXWZHKDGWRGULYH  . 
)LQDOO\ZHGURYHEDFNWR=XULFKDQGFDXJKW  . 
:HHQMR\HG DQGZH¶UHORRNLQJIRUZDUGWR
JRLQJEDFN  . 
Unit
A
B
C
Position of adverbs 2
Mid position
The following types of adverb usually go in mid position (see Unit 74A) –
 degree adverbs (e.g. almost, hardly, nearly, quite, rather, scarcely):
 The street lighting was so bad that we almost missed the turning.
although some (e.g. completely, enormously, entirely, greatly, slightly) can go in end position:
 I admire your work greatly. (or I greatly admire your work.)
Note that some degree adverbs are not usually used in mid position with some verbs. For 
example, enormously is not usually used in mid position with develop, differ, go up or vary; 
greatly is not normally used in mid position with care or suffer.
 adverbs which indicate the order of events, such as ﬁ rst, last and next. These can also go in end 
position, but if there is a phrase giving the time of an event they usually go before this:
 I ﬁ rst met her in 1997 . (or I met her ﬁ rst in 1997 .)
We don’t usually put these in front position, except to list actions (see also Unit 76B):
 Next, add three teaspoons of sugar.
 adverbs of frequency which say in an indeﬁ nite way how often something happens, including hardly ever, 
often, rarely, regularly, seldom (see also Unit 76B); and also the frequency adverbs always and never:
 We hardly ever see Kaspar nowadays, he’s so busy at the ofﬁ ce.
Note, however, that adverbial phrases of indeﬁ nite frequency (e.g. as a rule, on many occasions, 
from time to time, every so often) usually go in front or end position:
 As a rule, I go every six months. (or … every six months, as a rule; not I as a rule go …)
We rarely put long adverbials (including clauses; see Units 58 and 59), and prepositional and noun 
phrases in mid position. Usually they go in end position or front position for emphasis:
 She phoned home, anxious for news. (or Anxious for news, she phoned home.)
 He picked up the vase with great care. (or With great care he picked up the vase.)
 I’d seen Tarik the day before. (or The day before, I’d seen Tarik.)
Front position
Most types of adverb commonly go in front position in a clause (see Unit 74A). In particular – 
 connecting adverbs, which make immediately 
clear the logical relation to the previous 
sentence.
 The value of the yen has fallen. As a result, 
Japan faces a crisis.
 time and place adverbs, which give more 
information about a previous reference to a 
time or place.
 The last few days have been hot. Tomorrow 
the weather will be much cooler.
 comment and viewpoint adverbs, which 
highlight the speaker’s attitude to what they 
are about to say (see Unit 78).
 She has just heard that her sister is ill. 
Presumably, she will want to go home.
Note, however, that other positions are possible for these adverbs. 
Some words can be used both as comment adverbs or adverbs of manner. As comment adverbs they 
usually go in front position (but can go in other positions) and relate to the whole of the clause; as 
adverbs of manner they usually go in end position and modify the verb. Compare:
 Naturally, I’ll do all I can to help. and
 The radioactive gas occurs naturally in many areas.
150
75
Also: clearly, curiously, frankly, 
honestly, oddly, plainly, seriously
Note that for special emphasis or focus, adverbs that usually go in mid position (see B) and end 
position (see also Units 74 and 76) can sometimes be put in front position:
 In May, Maxine had a baby.             Regularly, Helena works on several paintings at once.
Unit
151
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 13 (page 248)
75. 1  Complete each pair of sentences using one adverb from the box. Put the adverb in front 
position (as a comment adverb) in one sentence, and in end position (as an adverb of manner) 
in the other. A
clearly         curiously         frankly        honestly        plainly        seriously
1 a  Curiously  , the house has two chimneys  , although there’s only one 
ﬁ replace.
 b   , Esther looked at him curiously  , trying to work out whether he was being 
serious or not.
2 a   , I was brought up to earn money  , not to steal it from others.
 b  , I’m perfectly capable of putting up the shelf myself  .
3 a  , she admitted  that she felt she wasn’t doing a good job.
 b  , I went to sleep during his lecture  , it was so boring.
4 a  A: Thanks for looking after the children for me.   
  B:  That’s okay. 
  A :    , I don’t know what I’d have done if you hadn’t been around 
to help.
 b   , I tried to speak  to him about his bad behaviour, but he kept 
making me laugh.
5 a  The chief executive of Eclom has phoned me every day this week to ask whether I’ve made my 
mind up.  , he wants me to take the job  .
 b   , I’d had very little sleep and was having difﬁ culty thinking  .
6 a  Lucas ﬁ  dgeted in his seat and kept looking nervously at the door.  , he was 
feeling ill at ease  .
 b  she always dressed  at work in a white blouse and grey skirt.
75.2  Cross out any adverbs or adverbials that are incorrect / unlikely in these sentences. B & Unit 74E
1 Asthma rates in cities do not enormously / signiﬁ cantly differ from those in rural areas.
2 Now that Lorna has moved to Kuala Lumpur, I from time to time / rarely see her.
3 I could see them easily / scarcely in the bright sunshine.
4 It was snowing and I was almost / by an hour late for the interview.
5 Carmen had often / on many occasions spoken at meetings before, so it was no surprise when she 
stood up.
6 I play chess with Lorenzo hardly ever / every week.
7 Although he had to lift heavy boxes in the factory, he greatly / rarely suffered from backache.
8 I forgot about the meeting nearly / entirely and my boss was really angry with me.
75.3  Which of the positions [1], [2] or [3] can the adverb or adverbial in brackets go in? A–C
1 [1] He [2] moved to New Zealand [3]. (the following year)
2 [1] The children [2] walked along the road [3]. (in single ﬁ le)
3 [1] We [2] see Alex [3] any more. (seldom)
4 [1] He [2] complained to his physics teacher [3] . (unhappy with the result)
5 [1] I [2] agree with you [3]. (entirely)
6 [1] I [2] meet [3] Emma at school. (often)
75
Unit
A
B
C
Adverbs of place, direction, indeﬁ nite frequency, 
and time
Adverbs of time which indicate a deﬁ nite point or period in time or a deﬁ nite frequency usually go in 
end position, or front position for emphasis, but not in mid position. Note that when these adverbs are 
in front position there is no inversion of subject and verb:
 I went to Paris yesterday. (or Yesterday I went to Paris.)
 We meet for lunch once a week. (or Once a week we meet for lunch.)
The adverbs daily, hourly, monthly, weekly, annually, quarterly (= four times a year), etc. only go 
in end position:
 I pay my subscription annually. (not Annually I pay …; not I annually pay …)
When we put certain adverbs of time in front position the subject must come after an auxiliary verb or 
a main verb be (see also Unit 100):
 At no time would he admit that his team played badly. (not At no time he would admit …)
 Not once was she at home when I phoned. (not Not once she was …)
If the main verb is not be and there is no auxiliary, we use do, although inversion is not necessary in 
this case:
 Only later did she realise how much damage had been caused. (or Only later she realised …)
Adverbs like this include negative time adverbials such as at no time, hardly ever, not once, only 
later, rarely, and seldom. Note also that we can put ﬁ rst, next, now and then in front position with 
the verb come to introduce a new event, when the subject follows the verb. But if a comma (or an 
intonation break in speech) is used after ﬁ rst (etc.) the verb follows the subject. Compare:
 At ﬁ  rst there was silence. Then came a voice that I knew. (not Then a voice came …) and
 At ﬁ  rst there was silence. Then, a voice came that I knew.
Adverbs of place and direction (or adverbials, particularly prepositional phrases) usually go in end 
position, but we can put them in front position to emphasise the location. The effect may also be to 
highlight what comes at the end (e.g. ‘a body’ in the example below). This order is found mainly in 
formal descriptive writing and reports. Compare:
 The money was eventually found under the ﬂ oorboards. (= end) and
 The police searched the house. Under the ﬂ oorboards they found a body. (= front)
If we put an adverb of place in front position we put the subject after the verb be (see also Unit 99A):
 Next to the bookshelf was a ﬁ replace. (or less formally Next to the bookshelf there was a 
ﬁ replace; not Next to the bookshelf a ﬁ replace was.)
We can also put the subject after the verb with intransitive verbs (except with a pronoun subject) used 
to indicate being in a position or movement to a position:
 Beyond the houses lay open ﬁ elds. but 
 Beyond the houses they lay. (not … lay they)
Note that ‘... open ﬁ elds lay’ might be used in 
a literary style. 
However, we don’t usually put the subject after the verb when we talk about actions: if one of these 
intransitive verbs is followed by an adverb of manner; with other intransitive verbs; or with transitive 
verbs:
 Through the waves the boy swam powerfully. (rather than … swam the boy powerfully.)
 Outside the church the choir sang. (rather than … sang the choir.)
 In the garden Nik built a play house for the children. (not In the garden built Nik …)
152
76
Also: hang, live, sit, stand; come, ﬂ y, 
go, march, roll, run, swim, walk
Unit
153
Exercises
76.1  Rewrite the sentences putting the italicised adverbs of place or direction at the front of the 
clause. If possible, invert the order of subject and verb. A
1 A dark wood was at the bottom of the garden.
 At the bottom of the garden was a dark wood.
2 The car stopped suddenly and Daniel jumped out.
3 Two small children stood outside the door.
4 The boys were playing cricket in the park, despite the muddy conditions.
5 A jade necklace hung around her neck.
6 The man released the monkey and it climbed up the tree.
7 The door burst open and a delegation from the striking workers marched in.
8 While Marko was looking around for his net the ﬁ sh swam away.
9 Most of the furniture was modern, but a very old grandfather clock was in the corner.
 10 Lea found it difﬁ  cult to concentrate in the ofﬁ ce , but she worked more efﬁ ciently at home.
76.2  If possible, rewrite the italicised parts of these sentences putting the time adverbial in front 
position. Where you can, invert subject and verb, and make any other necessary changes. 
B & C
1 I trusted Dan completely, and I realised only later that he had tricked me.
 I trusted Dan completely, and only later did I realise that he had tricked me. 
2 After working so hard all summer, I had a holiday last week.
3 Professor Coulson was to give the initial paper at the conference, but a welcoming address came 
ﬁ rst by the head of the organising team.
4 The area was cleared before the explosion, and members of the public were in danger at no time.
5 I’ve got high blood pressure and I have to take tablets daily for it.
6 When it became clear that he was in danger of losing the election, a politician can seldom have 
changed his views so quickly as Beckett.
7 After a few days of relative calm, a blizzard came next, preventing us from leaving the hut.
8 It’s hard to imagine that we’ll be in Japan by next Friday.
9 You won’t have long to wait as trains for Rome leave hourly.
 10 My grandfather was a gentle man, and I hardly ever heard him raise his voice in anger.
76.3  If necessary, correct the word order in these sentences. A–C
1 I walk to work for the exercise, and I twice a week play squash.
2 If you take the job, monthly your salary will be paid into your bank account.
3 Down the hill the horse ran quickly.
4 Through the window Megan watched sadly.
5 Around the town drove she for hours looking for the gallery, until she spotted in a side street the 
place.
6 I tripped over the cat, dropped the tray, and across the room ﬂ ew it.
76
Unit
A
B
C
D
Degree adverbs and focus adverbs
Very and too
Before an adjective or another adverb we use very when we mean ‘to a high degree’, and too when we 
mean ‘more than enough’ or ‘more than is wanted or needed’. Compare:
 The weather was very hot in Majorca – perfect for swimming. (not … too hot …) and
 It’s too hot to stay in this room – let’s ﬁ nd somewhere cooler. (not … very hot …)
In negative sentences in informal spoken English we can use not too to mean ‘not very’:
 I’m not too bothered about who wins. (or I’m not very bothered …)
Even and only 
Even and only usually go in mid position (see Unit 75), but if they refer to the subject they usually 
come before it. Compare:
 My mother has only brought some food. (= She hasn’t brought anything else) and
 Only my mother has brought some food. (= My mother and nobody else)
 Aya can even speak French. (= in addition to everything else she can do) and
 Even Aya can speak French. (= you might not expect her to) (rather than Aya even …)
Much and very much
In afﬁ rmative sentences in formal contexts, much can be used as a degree adverb before the verbs 
admire, appreciate, enjoy, prefer and regret to emphasise how we feel about things:
 I much enjoyed having you stay with us.  Their music is much admired.
Much is used in this way particularly after I and we. Note that we don’t usually use this pattern in 
questions (e.g. not Did you much enjoy …?).
We can use very much in a similar way before the verbs above and also before agree, doubt, fear, 
hope, like and want. Note, however, that we don’t use much before this last group of verbs. Compare:
 I much prefer seeing ﬁ lms at the cinema than on DVD. (or I very much prefer …) and
 We very much agree with the decision. (or We agree very much …; but not … much agree …)
We can also use much or very much before a past participle which is part of a passive:
 The new by-pass was (very) much needed.
We don’t use much but can use very much before past participle adjectives (see Unit 69A):
 I was very much surprised by her news. (or I was surprised …; but not I was much surprised …)
and we don’t use either much or very much before present participle adjectives:
 The hotel was (very) welcoming. (but not The hotel was (very) much welcoming.)
In negative sentences in informal contexts we can use (very) much before verbs such as appreciate, 
enjoy, like, and look forward to to emphasise a negative feeling about something:
 I didn’t ( very) much enjoy the ﬁ lm.
Degree adverbs can be used before adjectives, verbs, or other adverbs to give information about the 
extent or level of something:
 They’re extremely happy.  I really hate coffee.  He almost always arrived late.
Some degree adverbs, such as almost, largely, really and virtually, are usually used before the main 
verb, and others, such as altogether, enormously, somewhat, and tremendously, are usually used 
after the main verb. Degree adverbs are rarely used in front position (see Unit 75B).
Focus adverbs draw attention to the most important part of what we are talking about. Some 
(e.g. especially, even, mainly, mostly, particularly, speciﬁ cally) make what we say more speciﬁ c:
 There is likely to be snow today, particularly in the north. 
and others (e.g. alone, just, only, simply, solely) limit what we say to one thing or person:
 Many people offered to help me invest the money, but I only trusted Rick.
154
77
Unit
155
Exercises
77 . 1 Cross out any incorrect answers. B
1 We very / much / very much hope that the striking workers will now resume negotiations.
2 Thanks for organising the quiz night. Your help was very / much / very much appreciated.
3 I felt very / much / very much intimidated by some of the questions in the interview.
4 I had always very / much / very much admired her work, and it was great to meet her.
5 As a child, I very / much / very much wanted to be an artist.
6 I would very / much / very much prefer to be remembered as kind rather than wealthy.
7 It was very / much / very much thrilling to get Marie’s news.
8 When I was travelling in India I became very / much / very much interested in regional foods.
9 Kristof says that he wants to go into politics, but I very / much / very much doubt that he’s 
serious.
 10 I very / much / very much regret not being able to hear Dr Greco when she gave her lecture.
77 .2  Write very, too, or very / too if either is possible. C
1 Leo was in a wheelchair as he was still  weak to walk far.
2 Ellie has agreed to start work earlier, but she’s not  enthusiastic about it.
3 The instructions are  easy. You’ll have no trouble understanding them.
4 It was  alarming to learn that one of the plane’s engines had stopped.
5 We’ll be at the cinema well before the ﬁ lm starts. It won’t take  long to get there.
6 It was snowing  heavily for us to climb further up the mountain.
7 He revised  hard and did well in his exams.
8 The old bridge in town was  narrow for the coach to drive across, so we had to go an 
extra 50 miles to the new one.
77
77 .3  Put even or only in the most appropriate place in each sentence. D
1 Ben offered to let me stay with him while I was in Glasgow, and  he  offered 
to pick me up from the station.
2  I will  be in my ofﬁ ce on Monday next week as I’m going to Poland for a 
business meeting on Tuesday.
3 Every penny the charity raises helps the homeless, and  the smallest donation 
 can make a vital difference.
4 Jan seems to have invited everyone to the party.  he has  asked Ann, and 
they haven’t spoken to each other for years.
5  Louis  knew where the keys were kept, and nobody else.
6 I don’t get home from work until late, so  I  cook at the weekend.

Unit
A
B
Comment adverbs and viewpoint adverbs
Some adverbs are used to make clear what viewpoint we are speaking from; that is, identifying what 
features of something are being talked about:
 Financially, the accident has been a disaster for the owners of the tunnel.
 The brothers may be alike physically, but they have very different personalities.
Also: biologically, environmentally, ﬁ nancially, ideologically, industrially, logically, medically, 
morally, outwardly, politically, technically, visually
A number of phrases are used in a similar way:
 Politically / In political terms, this summer is a crucial time for the government.
Also: politically speaking, in terms of politics, from a political point of view, as far as politics is / 
are concerned
Some adverbs or phrases are used to say whose viewpoint we are expressing:
 The head of National Bank is to receive, according to reports, a £1 million bonus.
 In my view, the foreign minister should resign immediately.
Also: to my / his / her (etc.) knowledge, from my / his / her (etc.) perspective, personally, 
in my / his / her (etc.) opinion
We use some adverbs to make a comment on what we are saying.
some comment adverbs: examples
 indicate how likely we think 
something is
apparently, certainly, clearly, deﬁ nitely, obviously,
presumably, probably, undoubtedly
 indicate our attitude to or 
opinion of what is said
astonishingly, frankly, generally, honestly, interestingly,
luckily, naturally, sadly, seriously, surprisingly, unbelievably
 show our judgement of 
someone’s actions
bravely, carelessly, foolishly, generously, kindly, rightly,
stupidly, wisely, wrongly
Comment adverbs often apply to the whole sentence and are most frequently used in front position 
(see Unit 75A), although they can also be used at the end of the sentence and in other positions. 
At the beginning and end of sentences we usually separate them from the rest of the sentence by a 
comma in writing or by intonation in speech:
 Presumably, he didn’t hear me when I called.
 The book was based on his experience in China, apparently.
 If you practise continuously, you will undoubtedly get better.
Comment adverbs which show judgement usually follow the subject, although they can be put in 
front position for emphasis:
 He kindly offered to give me a lift. (or Kindly, he offered … to emphasise ‘Kindly’)
If comment adverbs apply to only part of the sentence they can be used in other positions. Compare:
 Astonishingly, she did well in the exam. (= I was surprised that she did well) and
 She did astonishingly well in the exam. (= she did extremely well)
 You’ve had a major operation. Obviously, it will be very painful for a while. (= I expect you to 
know this already) and
 When he stood up it was obviously very painful. (= the pain was clear to see)
156
78
Unit
157
Exercises
78.1  Rewrite the italicised words using an adverb from the box. Choose the most likely position for 
the adverb. A
 astonishingly             bravely            carelessly            generously
 interestingly            obviously            presumably            rightly
1 It was very surprising indeed that no paintings were destroyed by the ﬁ re in the gallery.
 Astonishingly, no paintings were destroyed by the fire in the gallery.
2 As you drive off the ferry, there are lots of different ﬂ ags ﬂ ying by the side of the road.
 It seems likely that  the idea is to welcome visitors from other countries.
3 Acting more kindly than they needed to, the builders agreed to plant new trees to replace the ones 
they had dug up.
4 Most people believe in a correct way that the prisoners should be released.
5 It was easy to see that she knew more about the robbery than she told the police.
6 He broke the window when he was painting because he wasn’t paying attention to what he was 
doing.
7 She picked up the spider and put it outside, showing no fear.
8 I found it strange that the road didn’t appear on the SATNAV. 
78.2  Complete the sentences with an appropriate viewpoint adverb from (i) and an ending from (ii). 
B
(i) (ii)
environmentally        ﬁ nancially
industrially         medically 
outwardly        politically
technically        visually
 
 … we’d be much better off if we moved there.
 … the performance was stunning.
 … it is relatively undeveloped.
 … she looked remarkably calm.
 … she could be sent to prison.
 … the doctors can’t ﬁ nd anything wrong. 
 … it is no longer the problem it once was.
 … he claims to be a socialist.
1 Thomas says that he is still getting severe headaches, although ...
 medically the doctors can’t find anything wrong.
2 As she stepped onto the stage she felt terriﬁ ed, but …
3 Now that lead is no longer added to most petrol, …
4 The country earns most of its income from agriculture and …
5 The band didn’t play terribly well, and the singing was awful, but …
6 The cost of living is much lower in the north, so …
7 Hansen is one of the richest men in the country, although …
8 Julie is likely to be ﬁ ned for failing to pay her gas bill, although …
78.3  Complete the sentences using the phrases from B either with the words from the box (or 
adjectives or adverbs formed from them) or your own words. B
architecture        democracy        geology        grammar         history 
1 Historically  speaking  , in what ways has disease affected the development of Western 
civilisation?
2  limestone is a relatively new rock.
3 The building is similar to the opera house in Milan  
 .
4  
the essay was well written, but its style was inappropriate.
5 The election was clearly rigged and the result is a severe blow to the country 
  .
78
Unit
A
B
C
Adverbial clauses of time
Hardly, no sooner, scarcely
When we say that one event happened immediately after another we can use sentences with hardly, 
no sooner, and scarcely (see also Unit 100). After hardly and scarcely the second clause begins with 
when or before; after no sooner it begins with than or when:
 The concert had hardly begun before all the lights went out.
 I had no sooner lit the barbecue than / when it started to rain.
We often use a past perfect in the clause with hardly (etc.), no sooner or scarcely and a past simple 
in the other.
Before, after and until
We use before or after to talk about an event happening earlier or later than another event:
 I put on my coat before I went out.
 The message arrived after I’d left.
We can often use either until or before when a situation continues to happen up to a time indicated 
in the adverbial clause:
 I had to wait six weeks until / before the parcel arrived.
However, we use until to talk about an action that continues to a particular time and then stops:
 They sat on the beach until the sun sank below the horizon, and then they went home.
and when the adverbial clause describes the result of an action in the main clause:
 He cleaned his shoes until they shone. (‘shining’ is the result of ‘cleaning’.)
As, when and while
We can often use as, when or while to mean ‘during the time that’, to talk about something that 
happens when something else takes place:
 As / When / While Miguel was eating, the doorbell rang.
We use when (not as or while) to introduce a clause which talks about –
 an event that takes place at the same time as some longer event (in the main clause):
 They were playing in the garden when they heard a scream.
 the circumstances in which the event in the main clause happens:
 When they are fully grown these snakes can be over two metres long.
We also use when to mean ‘every time’, and we prefer when to talk about past periods of our lives:
 I still feel tired when I wake up in the morning. (= ‘every time’)
 His mother called him Robbie when he was a baby. (= a past period)
We prefer when if one event happens immediately after another, particularly if one causes the other:
 You’ll see my house on the right when you cross the bridge.
 When the lights went out, I lit some candles.
In the ﬁ rst sentence, ‘as’ or ‘while’ would suggest ‘during the time that’ and the continuous would be 
more likely (‘… as / while you are crossing …’). In the second sentence ‘as’ or ‘while’ would be very 
unlikely because lights usually go out instantaneously.
We prefer as to say that when one thing changes, another thing changes at the same time:
 As the cheese matures, its ﬂ avour improves. (rather than When the cheese …)
We can also use ‘While …’, particularly with a continuous tense: ‘While the cheese is maturing …’.
We prefer while or as (rather than when) to talk about two longer actions that go on at the same 
time, although while is more common than as in informal speech:
 I went shopping while Liam cleaned the house. (or … as Liam cleaned …)
We use while or when (rather than as) to avoid ambiguity where ‘as’ could mean ‘because’:
 While you were playing golf, I went to the cinema. (As you were playing … = Because …)
158
79
Reminder ➜ M1 & M8
Unit
159
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 14 (page 249)
79. 1  Complete these sentences with as, when or while. If possible, give alternative answers and 
notice any differences in meaning. A
1 She fell over  she kicked the ball.
2  we were younger our parents had to pay for our music lessons.
3  I speak Spanish, I talk slowly to help people understand me.
4  I packed all the books away, Lana made a note of their titles on her laptop. 
5 She stayed at home watching television  her brother was at school.
6 Where did you live  you got married?
7  the results started to come in, it became clear that President Como had lost the 
election.
8 The humidity started to increase  the day wore on.
9 The snow was getting deeper and deeper  we waited for the train to arrive.
 10  the paint dries it changes colour from a light to a deep red.
79.2  If necessary, correct or improve these sentences. A
1 As I’m older I’d love to be a dancer. 
2 When the boy watched in fascination, the ants picked up the dead beetle and carried it off to 
their nest. 
3 The disk drive makes a buzzing sound while I switch my PlayStation on. 
4 As the car went by, someone waved to me from the back seat.
5 While Kasem had ﬁ nished, he tidied up the room and left. 
6 I was in the shower as the phone rang. 
79.3  Complete this talk about the life and work of a professor with before or until or both if 
possible. B
1 He continued to work at London University  he retired in 2007 .
2  he left his native country, he learned English by listening to the radio.
3 It wasn’t long  he was appointed Professor of Chemistry.
4 He married Martha  he moved to England in 1960.
5  he came to England he worked in his father’s grocery shop.
6 He applied for research positions  he was appointed to a post at London University.
7 He was almost unknown outside his ﬁ eld  he was awarded the Nobel Prize.
8 He would work in his lab for days at a time  he had completed an experiment.
79.4  Complete the sentences in any appropriate way. C
1 The paint on the sitting room wall had scarcely dried …
 before my daughter put her dirty hands all over it.
79
2 Martin had no sooner recovered from a broken ankle …
 
3 He had hardly put down the phone …
 
4 We had no sooner eaten …
 
5 Lisa had hardly ﬁ nished speaking …
 
6 I had scarcely driven to the end of the street …
 
Unit
A
B
C
D
Giving reasons: as, because, etc.; for and with
The prepositions because of, due to, and owing to can also be used before a noun or noun phrase to 
give a reason for something:
 We were delayed because of an accident.
 She was unable to run owing to / due to a leg injury. (= because of a leg injury.)
 We have less money to spend owing to / due to budget cuts. (= because of budget cuts.)
Note that we don’t use because alone before a noun or noun phrase:
 We were delayed because there was an accident. (not … because an accident.)
In current English we usually avoid owing to directly after a form of be:
 The company’s success is due to the new director. (not ... is owing to ...)
However, owing to is used after be + a degree adverb such as entirely, largely, mainly, partly:
 The low election turnout was partly due to / owing to the bad weather.
We can often use either it was due to … that or it was owing to … that:
 It was owing to his encouragement that she applied for the job. (or It was due to … that)
We can use for and with followed by a noun phrase to give a reason (compare B above):
 She was looking all the better for her stay in hospital. (= ‘as a result of’)
 With so many people ill, the meeting was cancelled. (= ‘as a result of there being’)
In formal or literary written English we can also introduce a reason in a clause beginning for, in that, 
or, less commonly, inasmuch as. For is a formal alternative to ‘because’; in that and inasmuch as 
introduce clauses which clarify what has been said by adding detail:
 We must begin planning now, for the future may bring unexpected changes. (not For the 
future …, we must …)
 The ﬁ  lm is unusual in that it features only four actors. (or In that …, the ﬁ lm is …)
 Clara and I have quite an easy life, inasmuch as neither of us has to work too hard but we earn 
quite a lot of money. (or Inasmuch as …, Clara and I …)
We can begin a clause with as, because, seeing that, seeing as, or since to give a reason for a 
particular situation:
 As it was getting late, I decided I should go home.
 We must be near the beach, because I can hear the waves.
 Since he was going to be away on his birthday, we celebrated before he left.
 We could go and visit Natalia, seeing that we have to drive past her house anyway.
Note that –
 it is common and acceptable for because to begin a sentence, as in:
 Because everything looked different, I had no idea where to go.
 to give reasons in spoken English, we most often use because. So is also commonly used to express a 
similar meaning (see also Unit 81). Compare:
 Because my mother’s ill, I won’t be able to come. (‘because’ introduces the reason) and
 My mother’s ill, so I won’t be able to come. (‘so’ introduces the result.)
 when it means ‘because’, since is rather formal. It is uncommon in conversation, but is frequently used 
in this way in academic writing:
 I had to go outside because I was feeling awful. (‘since’ is unlikely in an informal context)
 The results of this analysis can be easily compared to future observations since satellite 
coverage will remain continuous. (more likely than ‘because’ in this formal context.)
 seeing that is used in informal English. Some people also use seeing as in informal speech:
 Joel just had to apologise, seeing that / as he knew he’d made a mistake.
160
80
Unit
161
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 14 (page 249)
80
80. 1  Complete the sentences by putting an item from (i) and one from (ii), in the correct order. A
(i) (ii)
1  passengers were given a full refund 
2  Andrea agreed to book tickets for us all
3  I’ll buy you lunch
4  I’ve given up dairy products
5   we were recommended to buy the 
textbook second-hand
6  the guest lecturer was late
7  we get on so well
8  you should never walk under a ladder
a  it’s your birthday
b  it was her idea to go to the theatre
c  Dr Gomez spoke about his research instead
d  a new copy would be very expensive
e  I suggested we all go on holiday together
f  the train was delayed for more than an hour 
g  it’s supposed to be unlucky
h  I’m trying to lose weight
1 + f Since the train was delayed for more than an hour, passengers were given a   
 full refund.
2  as  .
3 Seeing as  . 
4 Because  . 
5  since  . 
6 As   . 
7  seeing that  . 
8  because  . 
80.2  Complete the sentences using due to or owing to with one of the phrases from  the box. If both 
due to and owing to are possible, write both. C
lack of interest         stress at work         heavy cloud        its central location        human error
1 She claims her illness is entirely due to / owing to stress at work.  
2 The cancellation of the competition is  .
3 The popularity of the restaurant is largely  .
4 It’s likely that the mistake was  .
5 We couldn’t see last night’s eclipse of the moon  .
 Now complete these sentences using because or because of + a phrase from the box. C
his age        his mobile was switched off        local opposition
the bright sunlight        there was a ﬂ y in it
6 I had to drive in dark glasses  .
7 I couldn’t speak to Jacob  .
8 The council had to withdraw its plan to close the swimming pool  .
9 My grandfather couldn’t do a sponsored parachute jump  .
 10 He sent the soup back  .
80.3  Rewrite these sentences using for or with instead of because (of). Give alternatives where 
possible. D
1 I got a job as a street sweeper because my money was running out.
 With my money running out, I got a job as a street sweeper. / I got a job as a 
 street sweeper, with my money running out.
2 I couldn’t hear what Isabella was saying because of the noise.
3 Olivia went to stay with her aunt because her father was in hospital.
4 I felt a lot ﬁ tter because of all the exercise I was doing.
5 Because the train drivers are on strike tomorrow, I don’t think I’ll go to town after all.
Unit
A
B
C Such that and in such a way that / as to; such … that
In formal contexts, such as academic writing, we can use such that to introduce a result:
 The model was designed such that the value of x could be calculated. (= ‘in a way that has the 
result that …’; or … in order that …; or … so that …)
Less formally we can also use in such a way that or in such a way as + to-inﬁ nitive with a similar 
meaning:
 The advertisement is printed in such a way that two very different pictures can be seen 
depending on how you look at it.
 Our business is managed in such a way as to minimise its environmental impact.
We can also use such + noun phrase + that to introduce a result:
 It is such a popular play that all the performances were sold out after the ﬁ rst day. 
(For so + adjective / adverb + that, see Unit 73.)
In order that and so that
We also use in order that and so that to talk about a purpose. Compare:
 She stayed at work late in order / so as to complete the report. and
 She stayed at work late in order that / so that she could complete the report. (not … in order 
that / so that to complete the report.)
So that is more common than in order that, and is used in less formal situations. Note that 
informally we can leave out that after so, but we always include it after in order.
A present tense verb in the main clause is usually followed by a present tense verb (or a modal with 
present or future reference – can, will, etc.) in the clause beginning in order that / so that. A past 
tense verb in the main clause is usually followed by a past tense verb (or a modal with past reference 
– could, would, etc.) in the clause beginning in order that / so that. Modal verbs are very often used 
after in order that / so that:
 Regular checks are made in order that safety standards are maintained.
 Advice is given in order that students can choose the best course.
 Did you give up your job so that you could take care of your mother?
 I hid the presents so that Marianna wouldn’t ﬁ nd them.
In order / so as + to-inﬁ nitive
To talk about the purpose of an action we can use in order / so as + to-inﬁ nitive:
 He took the course in order to get a better job.
 Trees are being planted by the roadside so as to reduce trafﬁ c noise.
In spoken English in particular it is much more common simply to use a to-inﬁ nitive without ‘in order’ 
or ‘so as’ to express the same meaning:
 He took the course to get a better job.
We rarely use just not + to-inﬁ nitive, but instead use so as not to or in order not to:
 He kept the speech vague i n order not to commit himself to one side or the other. 
(not … vague not to commit himself …)
 I wrote down her name so as not to forget it. (not … name not to forget …)
However, in contrastive sentences we can use not + to-inﬁ nitive, but + to-inﬁ nitive as in:
 I came to see you not (in order / so as) to complain, but (in order / so as) to apologise.
Note that we can put in order / so as before the to-inﬁ nitives in sentences like this.
162
Purposes and results: in order to, so as to, etc.
81
Unit
163
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 14 (page 249)
81
81. 1  Combine the two sentences in the most appropriate way using in order (not) + to-inﬁ nitive or 
so as (not) + to-inﬁ nitive. A
1 I had to borrow money from the bank. 
2 He packed his suitcase with the books at 
the bottom.
3 Bus fares in the city were being cut.
4 We crept quietly towards the deer. 
5 I walked around the outside of the ﬁ eld. 
6 We put up a fence. 
7 She looked down at the book in front of 
her.
8 The roadworks were carried out at night.
a  This was done to encourage people to use  
 public transport.
b  We wanted to prevent people walking across 
 the grass.
c  I didn’t want to damage the growing crops.
d  I did this to set up the business. 
e  They didn’t want to disrupt trafﬁ c too much.
f  We didn’t want to frighten them away.
g  She wanted to avoid his gaze.
h  He didn’t want to crush his clothes.
1 + d I had to borrow money from the bank in order to set up the business.   
(or … so as to set up … )
81.2  Look again at the sentences you wrote in 81. 1. Is it also possible to use only a to-inﬁ nitive, 
without in order or so as? Write ✓ or ✗. A
1 I had to borrow money from the bank to set up the business. ✓  
81.3  Complete the sentences with the correct versions of the phrases from the box. B
it will / would receive the new channels        
it won’t / wouldn’t take up a lot of computer memory        
mosquitoes can’t / couldn’t get in        nobody will / would know it was there
 people can / could walk around the gardens         we can / could see the view over the city
1 They have an open day at their house each year so that people can walk around the 
 gardens.
2 I put a rug over the stain on the carpet so that  .
3 There were screens on all the windows so that  .
4 The software is designed so that  .
5 We went up to the top ﬂ oor so that  .
6 The TV needs to be retuned so that  .
81.4  Rewrite each sentence less formally in two ways; once using in such a way that and once using 
in such a way as to. C
1 The factory demolition was planned such that any risk to the public was avoided. 
 The factory demolition was planned in such a way that any risk to the public  
 was avoided. / The factory demolition was planned in such a way as to avoid 
 any risk to the public.
2 The meeting room is designed such that everyone’s voice can be heard without the use of 
microphones. 
3 The website is organised such that it is easy to navigate. 
4 If the dial is rotated such that the number 1 is at the top, the valve opens. 

Unit
A
B
C
Contrasts: although and though; even though / if; 
while, whilst and whereas
While, whilst and whereas
In formal contexts we can use while or whilst with a meaning similar to ‘although’ to introduce 
something that qualiﬁ es what is said in the main clause or something that may seem to conﬂ ict with 
it. In this case, the while / whilst clause comes before or within the main clause, but not after it:
 While / Whilst there is no evidence that Rob cheated, we were all astonished that he passed 
the exam. (not We were all astonished that he passed the exam, while …)
 The diesel model of the car, while / whilst more expensive, is better value for money. 
Note that whilst is a rather literary word and some people avoid using it.
We can use while or whereas (or less often whilst) to say that something contrasts with something 
in the main clause. The while / whereas clause may come before or after the main clause:
 Juan gets lots of homework from school, while / whereas Mia gets very little.
 While / Whereas I always felt I would pass the exam, I never thought I would get an A grade.
We don’t use whereas if what is said in the subordinate clause makes what is said in the main clause 
unexpected:
 Although / While Sophie’s father is from Spain, she doesn’t speak Spanish. (not Whereas …)
We can use -ing and past participle (-ed) clauses after although, though, while and whilst, and also 
clauses with the subject and verb left out (see Unit 59D).
Even though and even if
We can use even though (but not ‘even although’) to mean ‘despite the fact that’ and even if to mean 
‘whether or not’. Compare:
 Even though Matt doesn’t speak 
Spanish, I think he should still visit 
Madrid.
= Despite the fact that
he doesn’t speak Spanish
i.e. the speaker knows 
that Matt doesn’t speak 
Spanish
 Even if Matt doesn’t speak Spanish, 
I think he should still visit Madrid.
= Whether or not he 
speaks Spanish
i.e. the speaker doesn’t 
know deﬁ nitely whether 
Matt speaks Spanish or not
Although and though
We use although or (less formally) though to say that there is a surprising contrast between what 
happened in the main clause and what happened in the adverbial clause:
 Although / Though Reid failed to score himself, he helped Jones to score two goals. 
With a similar meaning, we can use despite the fact that / in spite of the fact that (e.g. Despite the 
fact that / In spite of the fact that Reid failed to score …), despite / in spite of + -ing (e.g. Despite 
/ In spite of Reid failing to score …), or despite / in spite of his / her + noun (e.g. Despite / In spite 
of his failure to score …).
Note that we can use though, but not although, at the end of a clause:
 I eat most dairy products. I’m not keen on yogurt, though.
We can give special emphasis to an adjective by putting it before though in the pattern adjective 
+ though + noun / pronoun + verb (usually a linking verb such as appear, be, become, feel, look, 
seem, sound, prove, etc.). As (but not although) can be used instead of though. Compare:
 Hot though (or as) the night air was, they slept soundly. and
 Although / Though the night air was hot, they slept soundly.
164
82
Unit
165
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 14 (page 249)
82
82. 1  Join the sentence halves and give special emphasis to the adjective by moving it to the front of 
the sentence. Use either though or as. A
1 it may seem amazing 
2 she was frightened
3 food became scarce 
4 the climbers were experienced 
5 the instructions ﬁ rst appeared 
confusing
6 it looked disgusting 
7 she felt conﬁ dent 
8 their new products have proved 
successful 
a   they were very useful when I looked at them in 
detail
b  she forced herself to pick up the snake
c  they had never faced such severe conditions before
d  the company is still in ﬁ nancial difﬁ culties
e  they always found enough to share with me
f  she knew the examination would not be easy
g  my brother Johan has just won the lottery 
h  it was actually quite tasty
1 + g Amazing though it may seem, my brother Johan has just won the lottery.   
(or Amazing as it may seem … )
82.2  Expand the notes in brackets and rewrite the sentences using In spite of + -ing in 1–3 and In 
spite of his / her + noun in 4–6. A
1 Although she has to cope with three small children, … ( taking – part-time MBA course) 
In spite of having to cope with three small children, she is taking a part-time 
 MBA course.
2 Although he was much younger than the others, … ( was – most outstanding rider – team)
3 Although he ate a big lunch, … ( had – three-course meal – evening)
4 Although he was frightened, … ( allowed – huge spider – placed in his hands)
5 Although she is obviously intelligent, … ( ﬁ nds – it difﬁ cult – express – ideas in writing)
6 Although she was ill, … ( went – walking holiday – Nepal)
 Now rewrite the sentences you have written beginning Despite the fact that …
1 Despite the fact that she has to cope with three small children, she is taking
 a part-time MBA course.
82.3  Underline the correct phrase. B
1 The driver stopped to let on more passengers even though / even if the bus was already full.
2 I wouldn’t tell you where Mariam lives even though / even if I knew.
3 Even though / Even if I only play one match for my country, I’ll be happy.
4 Even though / Even if he had just had lunch, Thomas bought a hamburger. 
5 He plays for France even though / even if he was born in Algeria.
6 You won’t see all the animals in the zoo even though / even if you stay for the whole day.
7 Even though / Even if I’m quite old, I still miss my parents.
8 I still couldn’t afford to go to Taipei, even though / even if I took the cheapest route.
82.4  Rewrite these sentences with a similar meaning. Begin the sentence with Whereas if possible 
and While if not. C
1  Horse riding is an expensive pastime, but more and more people are taking it up.
While horse riding is an expensive pastime, more and more people are taking it up.   
(Whereas … is not possible )
2  A decade ago only 5% of students dropped out of college, but the ﬁ gure today is 
25%.
3  The temperature is below freezing, but it actually feels quite warm when the sun is out.
4  The cost of rail travel has increased, but the number of train passengers has grown.
5  I’ve always wanted to visit Australia, but I’ve never had any wish to go to Canada.
Unit
A
B
C
E
D
If  1
We can talk about possible future events with a present perfect verb in the if-clause and a future form 
(will, present continuous, or be going to) in the main clause. Sometimes present perfect or present 
simple can be used with a similar meaning:
 I ’ll lend you War and Peace if I’ve ﬁ nished it before you go on holiday. (or … if I ﬁ nish …)
 If you haven’t paid the bill by Friday, we’re taking the carpets back. (or If you don’t pay …)
However, to focus on the future consequences of a past event, we use the present perfect. Compare:
 If I’ve failed my exam again, I’m giving up the course. (suggests I have already taken the 
exam; I don’t know the result) and
 If I fail my exam again, I’m giving up the course. (I may or may not have taken the exam)
We use if it was not for + noun phrase (or more formally if it were not for + noun phrase) to say 
that one situation is dependent on another situation or on a person (see also Unit 85A). When we talk 
about the past we can also use if it had not been for + noun phrase:
 If it wasn’t / weren’t for Nina, the conference wouldn’t be going ahead.
 If it hadn’t been for Dad, I wouldn’t have gone to college. (or If it wasn’t / weren’t for …)
In formal language we can also use Were it not for … and Had it not been for … (see Unit 84A):
 Were it not for Nina …
 Had it not been for Dad…
We can use but for + noun with a similar meaning, particularly in formal contexts:
 The village school would have been closed years ago but for the determination of teachers 
and parents to keep it open. (= … if it hadn’t been for the determination …)
Unreal conditionals
In unreal conditionals we can use if …were + to-inﬁ nitive rather than if + past simple to talk about 
imaginary future situations, particularly when it is unlikely that the situation in the if-clause will 
happen (see also Unit 14):
 If the technology were to become available, we would be able to expand the business.
However, note that we don’t usually use this pattern with verbs such as belong, doubt, enjoy, know, 
like, remember, and understand when they describe a state:
 If I knew they were honest, I’d gladly lend them the money. (not If I were to know …)
We sometimes use this pattern to make a suggestion sound more polite:
 Would it be too early for you if we were to meet at 5:30?
We can use if-clauses with a present tense verb to introduce certain conditions under which 
something is true. In this case, ‘if’ has a meaning similar to ‘when’: 
 The video pauses if you click on this button.
 If age-related changes are taken into account, the conclusion remains the same. 
Real conditionals
In real conditionals we usually use a present tense verb in the if-clause to talk about the future:
 If you leave now, you’ll be able to catch the 5 o’clock train. (or If you’re leaving now …)
However, in conversation we can use be going to instead of a present tense verb:
 If I ’m going to catch the train, I’ll have to leave now.
 We’ll need more chairs if we ’re going to invite so many people to the performance.
When we make offers, and give instructions or advice we can use an imperative in the main clause:
 Take another sandwich if you’re hungry.
 If you have a mobile phone, check that it is turned off.
166
83
Reminder ➜ M9–M17
Unit
167
Exercises
 83
83. 1  Complete these sentences with an imperative (1–3) or an  if-clause (4–6). A
1 There have been a lot of thefts from cars in the city centre. If you leave your car there, 
make sure it’s locked. / don’t leave any valuables in it.
2 If you have any more problems with the computer,  .
3 If you see Ned today,  .
4 
 keep well away from them. 
5 
 don’t hesitate to get in touch with me again.
6 
 get off at the stop near the library.
83.2  Complete the sentences using the verb pairs from the box. Use the present simple or present 
perfect in the if-clause, and give alternatives. Notice any differences in meaning. C
not ﬁ ll in – need        not help – go        leave – meet
not arrive – give         study – know         break – have to
1 If you have studied / study  Macbeth, you’ll know  the scene with the witches.
2 If you  home before I get there, I’ll  you at the airport.
3 If you  the window, you’ll  pay for it.
4 If the taxi  by 10 o’clock, I’ll  you a lift to the station.
5 If you  an application form, you will  to do so before you can 
be considered for the job. 
6 If the antibiotics  by the end of the week, I’ll  back to the 
doctor.
83.3  If necessary, correct the italicised part of the sentence using a past simple form of the same 
verb. D
1 I’d sell the house immediately if it were to belong to me.
2 If they were to hold an election now, the Democrats would undoubtedly win.
3 I’d go back to the restaurant if I were to like sushi more. 
4 If I were to doubt his honesty, I wouldn’t employ him.
5 There would be no cinema in the town if the Odeon were to close.
6 If I were to understand Chinese, I’d do the translation myself.
83.4  Complete these rewritten sentences with similar meanings. E
1 The weather was terrible. Otherwise, we would have gone walking this weekend. If it had …  
not been for the terrible weather, we would have gone walking this weekend.
2 His happiness would have been complete except for his anxiety over Carla. If it were 
 
3 The strike would probably still be going on if the government hadn’t intervened. Were it 
 
4 The ﬁ ght could have got out of hand if the police hadn’t arrived. Had it 
 
5 Everything was quiet except for the sound of birds singing. But for 
 
6 There would have been far more wars in the last 50 years without the United Nations. If it was 
 
7 We would have been here two hours ago except for the roadworks. If it had 
 
Unit
A
B
C
D
If  2
In a real conditional sentence, we use if … happen to, if … should, or 
if … should happen to to talk about something which may be possible, 
but is not very likely. If … happen to is most common in spoken English:
 If you happen to be in our area, drop in and see us. (or If you should [happen to] be ...)
Note that we don’t usually use this pattern in unreal conditionals talking about states or events in the 
if-clause which the speaker perceives as highly unlikely or impossible:
 If the North Sea froze in winter, you could walk from London to Oslo. (but probably not If the 
North Sea happened to freeze / should (happen to) freeze in winter …)
In comparison clauses we can use as if followed by a noun phrase, -ing clause, past participle (-ed) 
clause, or to-inﬁ nitive to introduce a comparison with a situation described in the main clause. We do 
this to give an explanation or to say that something appears to be the case but is not:
 Magnus walked in as if nothing had happened.
 His hands made a circular motion, as if steering a bus through a sharp bend.
 When he caught the ball, Lee fell to the ﬂ  oor as if hit by a bullet.
 As if to convince herself that Luis was really there, she gently touched his cheek.
Note that we can use as though instead of as if, and in informal speech some people use like with the 
same meaning:
 The crowd reacted as though they were watching a boxing match. (or … as if …)
 He walked into the room like nothing had happened. (or … as if …)
We don’t usually use if … will in conditional clauses. However, we can use if … will –
 when we talk about a result of something in the main clause. Compare:
 Open a window if it will help you to sleep. (or … if it helps you to sleep; ‘Helping you to 
sleep’ is the result of opening the window) and
 I will be angry if it turns out that you are wrong. (not … if it will turn out …; ‘Turning out that 
you are wrong’ is not the result of being angry)
 in requests or with the meaning ‘if you are willing to’ ( or if … would to be more polite):
 If you will / would take your seats, ladies and gentlemen, we can begin the meeting.
 in real conditionals when we want to show that we disapprove of something. In this case, will is 
stressed in speech (see also Unit 16B):
 A: I’m tired.        B: Well, if you will go to bed so late, I’m not surprised.
Note that we can use if … won’t when we talk about a refusal to do something:
 There’s no point in trying to teach the class if they won’t pay attention.
When the ﬁ rst verb in a conditional if-clause is should, were, or had we 
can leave out if and put the verb at the start of the clause (see Units 99 
and 100 for more on inversion). We do this particularly in formal or literary English, and only in 
hypothetical conditionals (a type of unreal conditional which answers the question ‘What would 
happen if …?’):
 Should any of this cost you anything, send me the bill. (= If any of this should cost …)
 It would be embarrassing, were she to ﬁ nd out the truth. (= … if she were to ﬁ nd out …)
 Had they not rushed Jo to hospital, she would have died. (= If they hadn’t rushed Jo …)
168
84
Reminder ➜ M9–M17
Unit
169
Exercises
84. 1  Rewrite these sentences with similar meanings. Begin with the word given. A
1 Consult your doctor again if the symptoms remain 72 hours after starting the course of 
medicine.  Should … the symptoms remain 72 hours after starting the course of 
medicine, consult your doctor again.
2 You would know what you have to do for homework, if you had not been absent from school on 
Friday. Had …  
  .
3 Clare would have been able to stay with her friends if they were still living in Brussels. Were …
 .
4 The factory would not have had to shut down if the workers were prepared to accept a wage cut. 
Were …  . 
5 We shall have to reduce the number of employees if the ﬁ nancial performance of the company 
doesn’t improve in the near future. Should …  
  .
6 I might have considered taking the job if the salary had been higher. Had … 
  .
84.2  If necessary, correct the italicised parts of these sentences. B
1 If I will press this button, will it start to record?
2 You’re welcome to borrow my old bike, if you think it will be of any use to you.
3 If he won’t resign, the Prime Minister should sack him.
4 If the disease will be untreated, it can lead to brain damage.
5 If you’ll tell me where the vacuum cleaner is, I’ll do some cleaning.
6 If you’ll complain about me, I’ll get into trouble with my teacher.
7 If it’ll save money, I’m willing to go by public transport.
84.3  If possible, rewrite the italicised parts of these sentences with happen to. If it is unlikely, write 
✗ after the sentence. C
1 If I see Georgia when I’m in Rome, I’ll send her your regards.
 
2 If a UFO landed in the centre of New York, there would be mass panic.
 
3 The plan for a new airport to be built outside London is bad news if you live nearby.
 
4 If I was the President, I would order our nuclear weapons to be destroyed.
 
5 If you are in the south of Spain next week, there is a good chance of seeing a total eclipse of the 
sun.
 
84.4  Complete the sentences using your own words or the notes if you prefer. D
(agree – everything Julia said)         (I – say – shocking)         (it – reverse – wall)        
(try – imagine – contained)        (overcome – great weariness)
1 My father raised his eyebrows as if I had said something shocking. 
2 He folded his arms on the table and laid his head on them, as if …
3 She stared hard at the parcel as if …
4 He nodded his head slowly as if …
5 The back of the car looked as if …
84
Unit
A
B
If I were you …; imagine he were to win
Were is used in this way in other patterns when we talk about imaginary situations – 
(i) when we use were + subject + to-inﬁ nitive or were + subject as a more formal alternative to if + 
subject + was / were (see also Unit 84A):
 Were the election to be held today, the Liberals would win easily. (or If the election was / 
were held today …)
 Were I not in my seventies and rather unﬁ t, I might consider taking up squash. (or If I wasn’t 
/ weren’t in my seventies and rather unﬁ t …)
(ii) after wish:
 I enjoy my job enormously, but I wish it were closer to home. (or … I wish it was …)
 Of course I’m pleased that Jan has been given the award. I only wish he weren’t so boastful 
about it. (or … I only wish he wasn’t …)
(iii) after if only when we express our regret that a situation isn’t different:
 ‘If your job is so bad, why don’t you leave?’ ‘ If only it were that simple.’ (or If only it was …)
 I’d really like to do accounting. If only I weren’t so poor at maths. (or If only I wasn’t …)
(iv) after would (’d) rather and would (’d) sooner when we talk about preferences:
 I feel embarrassed about what happened and would rather the event were forgotten. 
(or … was forgotten.)
 ‘I’ve arranged a meeting for the end of July.’ ‘I ’d sooner it were earlier, if possible. (or … it was 
earlier.)
(v) in sentences or clauses beginning with suppose, supposing and imagine:
 Suppose I were to lower the price by £100. Would you consider buying the car then? 
(or Suppose I was to lower …)
 I know it looks rather dirty now, but imagine the house were (to be) repainted. It would look 
a lot more attractive. (or … imagine the house was (to be) repainted.)
And in comparisons we can use were –
(vi) after as if and as though (see Unit 84D) and even if:
 I remember stepping off the boat in New York as if it were yesterday.
 Despite losing the election, she continues to act as though she were prime minister.
 It’s too late to start the work this year even if it were possible to ﬁ nd the money for it.
In unreal conditional sentences we can use were after any subject 
in the if-clause, including singular ﬁ rst and third person subjects 
(e.g. I / she / he / it). This use of were is sometimes called the past subjunctive, and is generally 
preferred only in formal contexts. Note that although the verb has a past form, reference is to the 
imagined present or future:
 If your mother were here, I’m sure she wouldn’t let you eat all those chocolates.
 My job would not exist if it were not for government funding.
Was can be used instead of were with the same meaning (‘If your mother was here …’, etc.).
However, we prefer were rather than was when we give advice with If I were you …:
 If I were you, I’d take it back to the shop. It’s got a hole in it. (rather than If I was you …)
170
85
Reminder ➜ M13–M17
Unit
171
Exercises
85. 1  Match an item from (i) with an ending from (ii) to form a sentence. Begin Were … (not). Bi
(i)
1 … found guilty of libel …
2 … government to increase university fees …
3 … anyone to lean against the window …
4 … not already busy in August …
5 … to see the conditions in which the refugees 
are living …
(i)
a  the glass would certainly break
b  you would be horriﬁ ed
c  I would gladly accept your invitation
d  there would be an outcry from students
e  the newspaper would face huge legal  costs 
1 + e Were it to be found guilty of libel, the newspaper would face huge legal costs.   
85.2  Expand the notes to write a sentence to go before each question below. Use Suppose, 
Supposing, or Imagine, followed by a pronoun, noun or noun phrase and then were. Bv
1 (miss / last train) Supposing we were to miss the last train.  How would we get home?
2 (inherit / million dollars)  
How would it change your life?
3 (parents / tell you / emigrating to Canada)  
How do you think you would react?
4 (Spain / win / World Cup)  
How would you celebrate?
5 (population of Britain / all Buddhist)  
How would its society be different?
85.3  Complete the sentences with either as if or even if followed by an appropriate pronoun and 
then were. Bvi
1 Muller spoke slowly as if it were  a great physical effort.
2 Every day Mrs Demir would walk around the park  snowing.
3 She knew she wouldn’t be able to eat rabbit meat  starving.
4 Theo completely ignored me  not standing next to him.
5 He picked Natasha up  no heavier than a two-year-old.
6 I don’t think I would have got the job  better qualiﬁ ed.
7 When Martina saw that I was stuck she laughed out loud  a joke.
8 I wouldn’t accept the job  to offer it to me.
85.4  Complete the sentences using one of the phrases in (i) with expanded notes from (ii). A & B
(i) (ii)
 if it were not for      if I were you
 wish he were if only it were
 ’d rather it were ’d sooner she were
 
 forgotten … classmates        going … friends
 not so critical … employees
 long nights … winter         as easy … that
 breakfast before … leave
1 I would be happy to live in the north of Sweden if it were not for the long nights in
winter  . 
2 I’m not happy about Jess going to Thailand alone. I  .
3 A: If you’re unhappy with your new car, why don’t you ask for your money back?  
B: Well,  .
4 I know you haven’t got much time, but  .
5 Wearing odd shoes to school was embarrassing and I  .
6 I’m very fond of Paul, but I  .
85
Unit
A
B
C
D
If … not and unless; if and whether; etc.
If and whether
We can use if or whether to say that two possibilities have been talked or thought about, or to say 
that people are not sure about something:
 They couldn’t decide if / whether it was worth resitting the exam.
 Do you know if / whether Ben’s at home?
Whether can usually be followed immediately by or not. Compare:
 I didn’t know if Aya was coming or not. (not … if or not Aya was coming.) and
 I didn’t know whether or not Aya was coming. (or … whether Tom was coming or not …)
We use whether rather than if –
 after a preposition (although if is sometimes used informally) and before a to-inﬁ nitive:
 We argued about whether butter or margarine was better for you. (informally … if …)
 I couldn’t decide whether to buy apples or bananas.
 in the pattern noun / adjective + as to whether to mean ‘about’ or ‘concerning’:
 There was some disagreement as to whether he was eligible to play for France.
Also: conﬂ ict, confusion, debate, discussion, doubt, question, speculation, uncertainty; 
concerned, indifferent, uncertain, undecided, unsure
and we prefer whether rather than if –
 after the verbs advise, choose, consider, depend on, discuss, talk about, and think about:
 You should consider whether the car you are interested in is good value.
 in a clause acting as a subject or complement:
 Whether the minister will quit over the issue remains to be seen.
 The ﬁ  rst issue is whether he knew he was committing a crime.
In real conditional sentences, we can often use either unless or if … not with a similar meaning:
 Unless the theatre is able to raise £100,000, it will have to close. (or If the theatre isn’t able 
to …; implies ‘it will have to close only if it can’t raise the money’)
However, we use if … not but not unless –
 when we say in the main clause that an event or action in the if-clause is unexpected:
 I’ll be amazed if Christie doesn’t win.
 usually in questions:
 If you don’t pass the test, what will you do?
 when the ‘only if’ implication does not apply:
 If it wasn’t the best performance of Hamlet I’ve seen, it was certainly the strangest.
We usually use if … not rather than unless in unreal conditional sentences:
 If I weren’t so tired, I’d give you a hand.
However, unless can be used in unreal conditional sentences when the main clause is negative:
 She wouldn’t have gone to university unless her parents had insisted.
If … not and unless
Unless is used in conditional sentences with the meaning ‘except if’:
 You can’t travel on this train unless you have a reservation.
With unless we use present tenses when we talk about the future:
 Unless it rains, I’ll pick you up at six. (not Unless it will rain …)
172
86
Unit
173
Exercises
86. 1  Match the sentence halves and write a new sentence with the same meaning, beginning each 
one with Unless … . A
1 We’ll never get to the meeting … 
2 Alternative sources of funding must be 
found …
3 If the roads haven’t changed in that part of 
town …
4 The weather must start improving soon …
5 If it isn’t ridiculously expensive …
6 You are only entitled to state beneﬁ t …
a  … or the farmers will lose their crops.
b  … if the train doesn’t leave within ﬁ ve minutes.  
c  … I’m sure I’ll be able to ﬁ nd my way there.
d  … or the research will not be able to continue.
e  … I think I’ll buy that painting.
f  … if you have been unemployed for six months.
1 + b Unless the train leaves within five minutes, we’ll never get to the meeting.  
86.2  If necessary, correct the italicised phrase using if … not. B
1 Unless she had gone to university, she would have gone into the army. If she hadn’t gone  
2 Unless the infection is treated urgently, there is a real danger that she will die.
3 Unless he was so clumsy, he’d be the best person to do the work.
4 You won’t be allowed into the country unless you have a visa.
5 It’ll be surprising unless Anya passes her piano exam.
6 Unless you get a loan from the bank, how will you pay for the house?
7 They’ll go on strike unless they get a pay rise.
8 Where will you stay unless Louise is at home?
9 The police can’t prosecute me unless they can prove I intended to steal the ring. 
 10 She’d be a really good teacher unless she was so disorganised. 
86.3  Write whether or if / whether (if both are possible) in these sentences. C & D
1 I was wondering  you’d had your exam results yet.
2 She was undecided as to  to ﬂ y or go by train.
3 Police have refused to conﬁ rm  or not they have arrested anyone for the theft.
4 It is unclear  the new regulations will affect all buildings or just new ones.
5 A: How much will the laptop cost?   
B: That depends on  I get one with a 15 or 17-inch screen.
6 Danny said that he was leaving home, but I didn’t know  to believe him.
7 Have you any idea  Steve will be at the meeting?
8 Can you remember  the door was open or closed when you got to the house?
9 There was considerable debate as to  chess was a game or a sport.
 10 I don’t know  Andrea’s going to wait for us or not.
 11 The government is considering  to hold an enquiry into the accident.
 12 Everyone in the village was very friendly. It didn’t matter  you’d lived there for a 
short or a long time.
86

Unit
A
B
C
Connecting ideas in a sentence and 
between sentences
However is often used as a sentence connector, but it can also be used –
 as an adverb when it is followed by an adjective, adverb, or much / many:
 We just don’t have the money to do the work, however necessary you think it is.
 as a conjunction when it means ‘in whatever way’:
 However she held the mirror, she couldn’t see the back of her neck.
Even though is a conjunction used to say that a fact doesn’t make the rest of the sentence untrue 
(see also Unit 82B). It connects ideas within a sentence:
 Even though it was midday, I put on the light.
Even so is a sentence connector used to introduce a fact that is surprising in the context of what was 
just said. It connects ideas between sentences:
 It was midday. Even so, I put on the light.
Some words and phrases (sentence connectors) are used to connect one sentence with a previous 
sentence or sentences. Often (but not always) these go at the beginning of the sentence:
 There was no heating in the building. As a result, the workers had to be sent home. 
Other words and phrases (conjunctions) are used to connect clauses within a single sentence:
 While I was waiting, I read a magazine.
 I stood up so that I could see better.
type of connection sentence connectors conjunctions
comparing, contrasting, 
and indicating that a 
situation (in the main 
clause) is unexpected
after all, all the same, alternatively, anyway, by 
contrast, even so, however (but see C), in any case, 
in contrast, instead, nevertheless, on the contrary, 
on the other hand
although, even though, 
though, whereas, while, 
yet
reasons and results as a consequence, as a result, consequently, for one 
thing, so; hence, in consequence, therefore, thus 
(the last four are rather formal)
as, because, for, in that, 
since, insofar as, so, so 
that
adding information above all, after all, also, besides, furthermore, 
in addition, likewise, moreover, similarly, what’s 
more; as well, too (the last two are not used at the 
beginning of a sentence)
condition if not, if so, otherwise as long as, assuming 
(that), if, on condition 
that, provided (that), so 
long as, supposing (that), 
unless
time: one event at the 
same time as another
at that time, at the same time, meanwhile as, when, whenever, while
time: one event before or 
after another
after, after that, afterwards, before, before that, 
earlier, later, previously, soon, subsequently, then
after, as soon as, before, 
since, until
Note that after, before and so can be both connectors and conjunctions.
We can’t use a sentence connector on its own with a comma to connect clauses within one sentence 
(e.g. not I expect to be promoted, if not I’ll leave).
However, a sentence connector can be used to connect two clauses in one sentence if the clauses are 
joined with and, but, or, so, or a semi-colon (;), colon (:), or dash (–):
 The building was extremely well constructed and, as a result, difﬁ cult to demolish.
 You could ﬂ  y via Singapore; however, this isn’t the only way.
174
87
Unit
175
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 14 (page 249)
87 . 1 Choose items from (i) and from (ii) to complete these texts in an appropriate way. Note the 
punctuation at the ends of the sentences and phrases already given. A & B
(i) (ii)
 alternatively
 as long as
 for one thing
 meanwhile
 otherwise
 so that 
 while
 yet  
 everybody had their fair share          
 you could poison them
 his face seemed familiar         
 it’s too expensive
 the rent was paid on time         
 the street was deserted
 the volcano continues to erupt         
 we were on holiday
1 Mara cut the cake carefully into slices so that everybody had their fair share.  
2 A small boy was kicking a ball against a wall;  .
3 I couldn’t remember meeting him before,  .
4 A mass evacuation of islanders is taking place.  
 .
5 A: Why don’t you like that new French restaurant?   
 B:  .
6 Ingrid came down with ﬂ u  .
7 My landlady didn’t mind me having parties in my room  
 .
8 One way of getting rid of weeds is to dig them out.  
 .
87 .2  Underline the correct option. A–C
1 Your essay is badly organised and full of spelling mistakes. Though / Nevertheless, it contains 
some very interesting ideas.
2 To the east the trees were left standing, while / in contrast to the west they were cut down.
3 I felt guilty about leaving the company even so / even though I knew it was the right decision.
4 The course taught me a lot about astronomy. Even though / Even so, there is still a lot to learn.
5 I expected my mother to be happy with the news. Instead / Although she started to cry.
6 Herbs are usually grown in temperate climates, whereas / on the other hand spices are mainly 
from tropical areas.
7 We were very short of money so / as a consequence we had to spend the night on a park bench.
8 I turned the ignition, but the car wouldn’t start. As / Meanwhile the lions were getting ever closer.
9 She wrote the questions on the whiteboard while / at the same time the students copied them 
into their books.
 10 Previously / Before I went to Australia, I’d never seen a koala.
 11 I’ll have to buy some ladders unless / if not I can borrow a pair from Harry.
 12 I ﬁ  rst met Connor in the 1970s. At that time / When he had long hair and a beard.
87 .3  Use your own ideas to complete the sentences. Begin however + adjective / adverb / many / 
much. C
1 She is determined to be a successful artist, however difficult it might be to achieve.  
2  , it is difﬁ cult 
to lose weight without cutting down on the amount you eat.
3  , it is important to spend some time apart.
4 Professor Malcolm is always happy to spend time with his students, 
 .
5  , it never fails to impress me. 
6 Some people never seem content,  .
87
Unit
A
B
C
Prepositions of position and movement
Above, over; below, under; beneath, underneath
We can use either above or over when we say that one thing is at a higher level than another:
 Above / Over the door was a sign saying, ‘Mind your head’.
However, we prefer above, when one thing is not directly over the other. Compare:
 They lived in a village in the mountains above the lake. (not directly over) and 
 The bird hovered just a few metres above / over the lake. (directly over)
We use over, not above, when something covers something else and touches it:
 She put a quilt over the bed.
and usually when we are talking about horizontal movement at a higher level than something:
 I saw the helicopter ﬂ  y out over the water, near the ﬁ shing boat.
Below is the opposite of above; under is the opposite of over. The differences in the uses of below 
and under are similar to those between above and over (see above):
 It’s hard to believe that there is a railway line below / under the building. (at a lower level)
 Her head was below the level of the table so nobody noticed her. (not directly under)
 She hid the presents under a blanket. (the blanket covers and touches the presents)
 Zara ran under the bridge. (horizontal movement at a lower level)
We can use underneath as an alternative to under as a preposition of place. Beneath is sometimes 
used as a more formal alternative to under or below.
Along, through
When we talk about following a line of some kind (a road, a river, etc.), we use along:
 They walked along the footpath until they came to a small bridge.
We use through to emphasise that we are talking about movement in a three dimensional space, with 
things all around, rather than a two dimensional space, a ﬂ at surface or area:
 He pushed his way through the crowd of people to get to her.
Through often suggests movement from one side or end of the space to the other. Compare:
 She walked through the forest to get to her grandmother’s house. and
 She spent a lot of her free time walking in the forest.
Across, over
We can use across or over to talk about a position on the other side of, or moving to the other side of 
a road, bridge, border, river, etc.:
 Antonio lives in the house across / over the road from ours.
 Once she was across / over the border, she knew she would be safe.
We use over rather than across when we talk about reaching the other side of something that is high, 
or higher than it is wide. Compare:
 He jumped over the fence into the garden. and
 He jumped across the stream.
When we are talking about something we think of as a ﬂ at surface, or an area such as a country or sea, 
we prefer across rather than over:
 He suddenly saw Eva across the room.
 The programme was broadcast across Canada.
We prefer all over rather than all across to mean ‘to or in many different parts of an area’. However, 
we commonly use across, or right across for emphasis:
 The disease has now spread all over the world. (or … (right) across the world.)
176
88
Unit
177
Exercises
88. 1  Complete the sentences with across or over, whichever is correct or more likely. If both are 
possible, write across / over. A
1 After I’d ﬁ nished work I walked  the car park to where Mona was waiting.
2 They own a house  the river in the old town.
3 The gate was locked so we had to climb  the wall.
4 You’re not allowed to walk  the railway line. You have to use the bridge.
5 Julie Wafaei was the ﬁ rst woman to row alone  the Atlantic.
6 Nuclear waste is transported  the country, despite objections from campaigners.
7 The trafﬁ c was busy on the main road so we walked  the pedestrian crossing.
8 She leaned out  the balcony rail and looked for Omar in the square below.
88.2  Underline the correct or most appropriate option(s) in each sentence. A & B
1 It took several minutes to walk across / over / along / through the corridor to the exit.
2 Across / Over / Along / Through the table I could see Oliver looking at his watch.
3 He fell across / over / along / through the ﬂ oor into the cellar below.
4 I could see Lisa across / over / along / through the other side of the river.
5 He cycles thousands of miles each year all across / over / along / through the country.
6 Hotels have been built across / over / along / through the beach for about 25 kilometres.
88.3  Correct the prepositions ( above, over, below, under) if necessary, or write ✓. C
1 He slept with his wallet below his pillow.
2 He broke his leg just below his knee.
3 The town stood at the top of the hill, and stretching into the distance under it were green ﬁ elds.
4 She threw a coat above her shoulders and stepped out into the cold.
5 He lived in a ﬁ rst-ﬂ oor ﬂ at above a greengrocer’s in Leyton.
6 When the police got to the car they found the driver slumped above the steering wheel.
7 He always wore a vest below his shirt, even in summer.
8 I could hear the plane ﬂ ying high over the clouds.
88.4  A number of common idioms include the prepositions in this unit. Match the idioms in italics to 
their meanings below.
1 A: What’s wrong?   
 B: I’m just feeling rather under the weather.
2 A: You never arrive on time. You’d be late for your own funeral, you would!   
B: That’s a bit below the belt, isn’t it?’
3 She already has 18 books on gardening under her belt and she is now working on number 19.
4 He had never played well for the club and left under a cloud.
5 She lost her temper and went completely over the top, accusing him of cheating.
6 They received a bonus in December over and above their monthly salary.
a in addition to 
b successfully completed
c ill
d cruel or unfair 
e with some people’s disapproval 
f extreme behaviour; indicating disapproval
88
Unit
A
B
C
Between and among
There are a number of common expressions using between and among:
 The concert features, among others, Karl Frisk and the Johnsons. (= other singers / groups are 
featured, too)
 I later found out that he had been a carpenter and a plumber, among other things. (= he had 
had other jobs, too)
 Between ourselves / Between you and me (= keep this a secret), I don’t think Jack is as 
honest as he should be.
Between and among are not only used as prepositions of place. For example, we can use either to talk 
about something divided or shared between people:
 The money is to be divided between / among the towns in the area.
 The prize will be shared between / among the ﬁ rst six ﬁ nishers in the race.
We also use between –
 to talk about comparisons and relationships: 
 There should be a better balance on the committee between the various ethnic groups.
 They are wrong to claim that there is a link between unemployment and crime.
Also: association, comparison, connection, contrast, correlation, 
difference, distinction, relationship
 to talk about choices:
 I have to choose between the universities of Leeds, York and Manchester.
 He felt torn between his family and his friends.
 to talk about discussions or the results of discussions when we specify the two or more people or 
groups involved:
 There was a disagreement between Emma, Jade and Zoe.
 The treaty was signed between Great Britain and France.
 to say that people or things share an amount of something:
 Between them, Will and Alice must earn about €100,000 a year.
 Last year the three companies built 30,000 houses between them.
We also use among –
 when we mean ‘existing or happening in a particular group’:
 The disease has now broken out among the hill tribes.
 Their music is still very popular among teenagers.
 when we mean ‘included in a particular group’:
 They are among the best hockey players in the world.
 Among the capital cities of South America, Quito is the second highest.
As prepositions of place we use between with two or more people or things that we see as individual 
or separate, and we use among when we see the people or things as part of a group or mass. Among 
is only used with three or more people or things:
 She held the diamond between her thumb and foreﬁ nger.
 Zimbabwe is situated between Zambia to the north, Mozambique to the east, Botswana to 
the west, and South Africa to the south.
 He stood among all his friends at the party and felt very happy.
 She eventually found her passport among the clothes in the drawer.
Note that amongst is sometimes used instead of among, but in more literary contexts.
178
89
Unit
179
Exercises
89. 1  Underline the correct option. A
1 For a couple of days I’ve had a pain between / among my shoulder blades.
2 He couldn’t ﬁ nd a microphone between / among all the recording equipment he had with him.
3 It would be easier to read if you put a line space between / among the paragraphs.
4 In the photograph Anna is standing between / among her parents.
5 The lost manuscript was discovered between / among the thousands of books in the cellar.
6 The buffet is towards the middle of the train between / among the ﬁ rst and second class sections.
7 She carried trays of drinks and food between / among the crowd of guests in the room.
8 I couldn’t see Robbie between / among the audience, although he said he would be there.
9 Rebecca commutes between / among her ﬂ at in Paris and her ofﬁ ce in Brussels.
89.2  Complete the sentences with between or among and the most likely words or phrases from the 
box. If you can use either, write between / among. B
amateur            its clients            my closest friends            cooking
intake of reﬁ ned sugar            the pupils            his remaining relatives
the striking dockers            teenagers             us 
1 I wasn’t feeling very hungry, so Daniel and I shared a bowl of noodles between us.
2 I bought four bars of chocolate and divided them  in the class.
3 The distinction  and professional athletes is becoming less clear.
4 It has become fashionable  to dye their hair in various colours.
5 When Malik died, his daughter inherited the house and the rest of his money was split 
 .
6 The advertising company is very successful, numbering most of the big banks 
 .
7 Researchers have found a striking correlation  and arthritis.
8 Given a choice  and washing up, I know which I’d prefer to do.
9 Luka and Ivan are  , so I’ll invite them to the wedding, of course.
 10 Late last night the talks  and their employers broke down.
89.3  Complete this email with between or among. A & B
89
Hi Mum and Dad!
Rome must be (1)  the most fascinating cities in the world. Y esterday we visited, 
(2)  other places, the Foro Romano – the centre of ancient Rome – and the 
Vatican. There is such an incredible contrast (3)  the old parts of the city built 
up to 2,000 years ago and the more recent parts. In the Vatican we climbed the long stairs 
to the top of St Peter’s church. The view from the top must be (4)  the most 
incredible over any city in the world. But (5)  you and me, I’m a bit scared of 
heights and was glad to get back to ground level. Later we went to the Pantheon, an ancient 
Roman temple, which is (6)  the Vatican and the Foro Romano. The Italian king 
Umberto I and the artist Raphael are (7)  the people buried there. In the evening 
there was a bit of an argument (8)  us over where we should eat – Jo wanted 
pizza, but I wanted to try some of the special local food. Eventually we found a place that did 
excellent pasta, (9)  other things. The only problem then was choosing 
(10)  the many different types!
Will be in touch again when I can.
Love, Keira
Unit
A
B
C
Prepositions of time
Until, by, up to
There are a number of ways of saying when something that has continued for some time stops –
 We use until (or informally till) to say that something continued or will continue to a particular time, 
and by to say that something happened or will happen either before a particular time or at that time at 
the latest. Compare:
 We have to be at home until 2:30. (We must not leave home before 2:30) and
 We have to be at home by 2:30. (We must arrive home either before or at 2:30)
 In informal contexts we can use up to or up till instead of until. We commonly use up to / till with 
now and with then:
 I’ve just bought a tablet computer. I’ve always used a laptop up to now. (or … up till now …) 
 We can use until now to talk about a situation that will not continue beyond now:
 Supermarkets say that until now there has been little consumer interest in buying organic 
produce. (The situation has changed or is going to change)
Note, however, that we don’t use until now for a situation that will or may continue into the 
future. Instead we can use so far or, in formal contexts, to date:
 It was certainly the best match of the football season so far.
 When the contract is signed it will be the building company’s biggest order to date.
We can use over or during when we talk about something that goes on for a length of time within a 
period of time, either for some of that period or for the whole of it:
 Weather conditions have been improving over / during the past few days.
 I hit my head and can’t remember anything that happened over / during the next hour or so.
However, if we talk about a short event that happens within a period of time, we prefer during:
 S he sneezed during the performance. (= once or a few times; not … over the performance.)
 During a pause in the conversation, she left the room. (not Over a pause …)
During, in, over, throughout
We use during or in to talk about a period of time within which an event or activity occurs. The 
activity may continue for the whole of the period of time:
 I stayed at home during the summer. (or … in the summer.)
 The population of the city has actually fallen during the last decade. (or … in the last …)
or the event may happen at some time, or be repeated a number of times, in the period of time:
 We went to Turkey during the summer. (or … in the summer.)
 He suffered a number of injuries during his career as a jockey. (or … in his career …)
We use during, rather than in, to mean ‘at some time in the period of’ before nouns such as illness, 
holiday, meal, stay, treatment, and visit, when we refer to an event which lasts some time:
 The President made the speech during a visit to Madrid.
and also with the phrase the whole (of), emphasising duration of an entire period:
 No one was allowed to leave the ship during the whole of its time in port.
We can use throughout to emphasise that something happens over the whole of a period of time:
 We had enough ﬁ  rewood to keep us warm throughout the winter. (or … warm during /  
through the winter.)
180
90
Unit
181
Exercises
 90
90. 1  In which of the sentences can the word in brackets replace during? Write ✓ if it can replace it 
and ✗ if it can’t. A & B
1 I’m going to get a cup of coffee during the break. (in)
2 She lost more than 15 kilos during her illness and she was off work for two months. (in)
3 He twisted his ankle during the match and had to retire injured. (over)
4 The weather was terrible here during December. (in)
5 The meeting will be some time during January. (over)
6 People no longer expect to be employed in the same place during the whole of their working 
lives. (in)
7 Do you think standards of numeracy have fallen during the last 20 years? (over)
8 She sang in a choir during her childhood. (throughout)
9 The town was rebuilt during the early 16th century. (over)
 10 It was impossible to buy bananas during the war. (in)
 11 Karl had a phone call during the meal and had to leave early. (in)
 12 My stomach ache got steadily worse during the evening. (over)
90.2  Complete the pairs of sentences with by and until. Use by in one sentence and until in the 
other. C
1 a I was feeling really hungry  the time dinner was served.
 b We sat around the ﬁ  re talking  the time dinner was served.
2 a Sorry I’m late. I’ve been in a meeting  now. 
 b   I thought Lars would have been here  now.
3 a I’ve got to pay the money back  the end of the month.
 b I’ve got  the end of the month to pay the money back.
4 a I put on an extra pair of socks.  then my feet were freezing cold.
 b I stood outside the cinema for an hour.  then my feet were freezing cold.
5 a She was already a leading economist  her early twenties.
 b She studied economics  her early twenties and then moved into law.
6 a I hope to ﬁ  nish the decorating  the weekend.
 b It will take me  the weekend to ﬁ nish the decorating.
90.3  Underline the correct or more likely option (or both if possible) in this email. A–C
Hi Pete
(1) Over / During the last three weeks we’ve covered thousands of kilometres by train. 
(2) So far / Until now we’ve been to Stockholm, Berlin and Rome, and now we’re in 
Amsterdam. (3) So far / Until now I thought Rome was the best city we’d been to, but I think I 
love Amsterdam even more. We’ve been here for three days, and have been very impressed 
with what we’ve seen (4) so far / until now. We spent the fi  rst two days in galleries, looking 
particularly at Van Gogh’s paintings. I didn’t know much about his work (5) so far / until 
now. Incidentally, we bumped into your friend Eleni (6) in / during our visit to the Van Gogh 
museum. We’re staying here (7) until / by Saturday and then we’re going to Paris. Must go 
now. We’re off to The Hague for the day and have to be at the station (8) until / by 9:30.
Hope all is well with you.
Love, Keira
Unit
A
C We can use but with a similar meaning to except (for), particularly after negative words such as no, 
nobody, and nothing:
 After the operation he could see nothing but / except (for) / apart from vague shadows.
 There was no way out but / except / apart from upwards, towards the light.
But for has a different meaning from except for. We use it to say what would or might have 
happened if the thing introduced by but for had not happened:
 The country would now be self-sufﬁ  cient in food but for the drought last year. (= if there 
hadn’t been the drought …)
 But for the leg injury he suffered last year, he would probably have been picked for the 
national team by now. (= if he hadn’t injured his leg …)
However, some people use except for in the same way as but for, particularly in informal spoken 
English:
 I’d have got there on time except for the taxi being late. (or … but for the taxi being late.)
 Except for the problems with my computer, I would have got the book ﬁ nished weeks ago. 
(or But for the problems with my computer …)
Note that we can use excepted, apart or aside after mentioning a person or thing to say that they are 
not included in the statement we make:
 It has been, 1984 excepted / apart / aside, the hottest July for the last 100 years.
182
We use except (for) to mean that something is not included in a particular statement, but we use 
besides to mean ‘as well as’ or ‘in addition to’. Compare:
 I don’t enjoy watching any sports except (for) cricket. (= I enjoy only cricket) and
 Besides cricket, I enjoy watching football and basketball. (= I enjoy three sports)
 I haven’t read anything by her, except (for) one of her short stories. and
 Besides her novels and poems, she published a number of short stories.
Apart from can be used with the same meanings as both except (for) and besides:
 I don’t enjoy watching any sports apart from cricket. (= except for)
 Apart from cricket, I enjoy watching football and basketball. (= besides; as well as)
B
We use except (for) to introduce the only thing(s) or person / people that a statement does not 
include:
 The price of the holiday includes all meals except (for) lunch.
 Everyone seemed to have been invited except (for) Mrs Woodford and me.
 I had no money to give him except (for) the few coins in my pocket.
We use except, not except for, with to-inﬁ nitives, and that-clauses:
 I rarely need to go into the city centre except to do some shopping.
 They look just like the real thing, except that they’re made of plastic.
We usually use except before prepositions, bare inﬁ nitives, and that-clauses including those 
where the word that is left out (see Unit 53). However, informally except for is sometimes also used, 
although this is grammatically incorrect:
 There is likely to be rain everywhere today except in Wales.
 There is nothing more the doctor can do except keep an eye on him.
 They look just like the real thing, except (that) they’re made of plastic.
We can use except for, but not except, with the meaning ‘but for’ (see C below).
Talking about exceptions
91
Unit
183
Exercises
 91
91. 1  Complete the sentences with except or except for. Indicate where both are possible. A & C
1 He was dressed very smartly  that his shoes were dirty.
2 I liked everything in the meal  the cabbage.
3 I had nothing to do  sit by the pool and relax.
4 We would have gone walking last week  the terrible weather.
5 She had no choice  to wait for the next train.
6 There are very few wolves left in the country  in the northern forests.
7 All the puddings on the menu cost €6  the ice cream, which was €4.
8 I’m in the ofﬁ ce all the time  at lunchtimes.
9 She might have won the race  hitting the last fence.
 10 The plant is found on every continent  Africa.
 11 He gave no excuse for turning up late  that he was tired.
 12 I drove all the way without stopping  to buy petrol.
91.2  If necessary, correct these sentences with besides or except (for). If the sentence is already 
correct, write ✓. B
1 She had never been out of the country besides a week in Ireland as a child.
2 Besides being small, Denmark is very ﬂ at, with villages linked by country roads.
3 The new road will increase trafﬁ c in the area except for damaging an area of woodland.
4 Except for his novels, Campbell wrote a number of biographies.
5 There was nothing in the fridge besides a rather mouldy piece of cheese.
6 He was unhurt in the crash except for a bruise on his forehead.
91.3  Match pairs of sentences and rewrite them as single sentences beginning But for the … . C
1 Katerina gave me excellent directions.  a  If it hadn’t, the building would have been 
2 The bad weather caused interruptions.   completed by now.
3 The charity supplied food and medicines.  b   Without this, human rights would not have 
4 The trees provided shelter.   improved in the country.
5 The EU threatened sanctions.  c   Otherwise, many more people would have 
6 The bank gave me a loan.   died in the famine.
   d   If it hadn’t, I would not have been able to set 
up my business.
   e  Without these, I would have got totally lost. 
   f   Otherwise, the wind would have caused even 
more damage to the house.
1 + e But for the excellent directions Katerina gave me, I would have got totally lost.
  
  
  
  
  

Unit
A
B
Prepositions after verbs
about usually means ‘concerning a particular thing’:
 They began to learn about nutrition when they were at primary school.
We use care about to talk about something we are (not) concerned about:
 He doesn’t seem to care about the effect a poor diet has on him.
for is used with ask to talk about what people want:
 He ﬁ  nished the drink quickly and asked for another.
with argue when we talk about giving reasons why something is true or right:
 Many people are arguing for a big tax cut. 
and with care to talk about doing the necessary things for someone or something in order to keep 
them in good health or condition:
 Jo cared for her disabled mother until her death last year. (or Jo took care of …)
or to mean ‘like’, particularly in negative sentences, and to mean ‘want’ in offers. Both of these uses of 
care for are rather formal:
 I don’t care for the theatre much.
 Would you care for a cup of coffee?
of is used with talk, know, and learn to talk about discussing, having or getting information:
 Mira went recently to Laos and can talk of nothing else. (or less formally … talk about …)
 The whole country knew of Churchill’s love of cigars. (or less formally … knew about …)
 I have just learnt of the death of Dr Ramirez. (or less formally … learnt about …)
We use ask of when we make or talk about requests:
 I have a favour to ask of you and your sister.
on is used with talk and agree to mean ‘concerned with a particular topic’:
 I was asked to talk on my research. (or … to talk about …)
 We agreed on a time to meet. (usually there has been previous discussion or disagreement.)
Note that we use agree to to say that someone allows something to happen:
 Once the government agreed to the scheme it went ahead without delay.
with is used with argue and talk when we go on to mention the person involved:
 I used to argue / talk with Pedro for hours.
We use agree with to say that two people have the same opinion:
 Adam thinks we should accept the offer, and I agree with him.
and to say that we approve of a particular idea or action:
 I agree with letting children choose the clothes they wear. (or I agree about / on …)
or to say that two descriptions are the same:
 Stefan’s story agreed with that of his son.
Some verbs are frequently followed by particular prepositions:
about for of on with
agree ✓✓ ✓
argue ✓✓ ✓
ask ✓✓✓
care ✓✓
know ✓✓
learn ✓✓
talk ✓ ✓✓✓
184
92
Unit
185
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 15 (page 249)
92
92. 1  Cross out any incorrect prepositions. A
1 I only advertised the car for sale on Wednesday, but by the end of the week ten people had 
phoned to ask of / for / about it.
2 We can learn a great deal after / about / for the oceans by studying even a small piece of coral.
3 I didn’t agree about / for / with a word of what she said.
4 Professor Owen is giving a talk of / with / on the Romans in Lecture Hall 1.
5 I had to care for / after / about my elderly parents when they both became ill.
6 For many years we have been arguing for / on / with changes in the way the college is managed.
7 She didn’t know of / about / on her stepbrother’s existence until her mother died.
92.2  Complete the sentences using the correct or most appropriate preposition from section A. 
Sometimes two answers are possible. A & B
1 On the website they ask  your email address. 
2 I ﬁ rst learnt  his decision to resign on the radio last night.
3 We’re going to talk  the council about planting some new trees in the park.
4 I don’t care  pop music at all. I much prefer classical music.
5 The teacher says we’ve got to do the test, so there’s no point in arguing  it.
6 Scientists do not agree  the origin of the universe. 
7 If you know  any reasons why you should not be given medical insurance, you must 
declare them here.
8 A:  Josh can be really stupid sometimes.     
B:  You shouldn’t talk  your brother like that.
9 She’s always arguing  her parents about what to watch on television.
 10 I know it’s a lot to ask  you, but would you look after the children while I’m in Japan on 
business?
 11 The course was brilliant. We learnt  using the Internet in teaching writing.
 12 A:  Dan said he’ll try to ﬁ  x my car.     
  B:  What does he know  cars?
 13 I don’t think the government cares enough  nursery education to fund it properly.
 14 After days of discussion, the committee agreed  the amount of money to donate.
92.3  These pairs of sentences include more verbs that are commonly followed by the prepositions 
in A. Can you explain the difference in meaning? Use a dictionary if necessary.
1 a The police acted on the information very quickly. 
 b I couldn’t be at the meeting, so my solicitor acted for me.
2 a I’ve been thinking a lot about your idea, and I’ve decided I’d like to support you. 
 b What do you think of the colour in the bedroom?
3 a Doctors have called on the Health Minister to resign. 
 b Campaigners have called for a referendum on the issue.
4 a They say he worked for the CIA in the 1980s.
 b She works with computers.
5 a We’re counting on Julia to supply the food for the party.
 b Playing exciting basketball counts for little if the team isn’t winning.
Unit
A
B
C
Prepositions after nouns
Some nouns can sometimes be followed either by of + -ing or a to-inﬁ nitive with a similar meaning, 
usually after the:
 Do staff have the opportunity of taking unpaid 
leave? (or … the opportunity to take …)
 The aim of providing clean drinking water has been achieved. (or The aim to provide …) 
However, some nouns, such as chance, sense and way, have more than one meaning and are 
followed either by of + -ing or a to-inﬁ nitive depending on which meaning is used. Compare:
 What’s the chance of getting ﬁ ve heads when you toss a coin ﬁ ve times? (= likelihood; not … 
chance to get …) and
 Will you get the chance to visit Miki in Japan? (= opportunity; not … of visiting …)
 He didn’t have the sense to move away from the puddle of water as the bus went past. 
(= good judgement; not … sense of moving …) and
 Everyone was very friendly and she had a sense of belonging within a few days of moving to 
her new school. (= feeling; not … sense to belong …)
 I’ve got a new way to cook rice. (= method; or … way of cooking …) and
 She has a really funny way of speaking. (= manner; not … way to speak)
Note also that of + -ing usually follows no / every / the sole / the slightest / (not) any / with the + 
intention, but that we can use either of + -ing or a to-inﬁ nitive in most other cases. Compare:
 I have no intention of lending Dan any more money. (not … no intention to lend …) and
 He announced his intention to stand in the election. (or … intention of standing …)
Some nouns can be followed by of + -ing but not usually to-inﬁ nitive:
 He’s got into the habit of biting his nails 
when he’s nervous.  
Many nouns are followed by the same prepositions as their related adjective or verb. Compare:
 Are you satisﬁ ed with the way that the business is being run? and
 The shareholders have expressed satisfaction with the way the business is being run.
A few nouns are followed by different prepositions. Compare:
 They became fond of each other at school. and
 Their fondness for each other grew and many years 
later they married. 
Some nouns take a preposition where their related verb does not. Compare:
 I respect Louis enormously. and
 I have enormous respect for Louis.
186
93
Also: proud of / pride in, 
ashamed of / shame about / at
Also: admiration for, ban on, discussion about / 
on, improvement in, inﬂ uence on, interview 
with, lack of, respect for
Note that many other nouns are commonly followed by of phrases which indicate possession, 
a property, or classify the noun by describing what it relates to. Compare: 
 He described the conductor as moving his arms like a windmill. and
 His description of the conductor was very funny.
Also: cost, effect, fear, likelihood, possibility, 
probability, problem, prospect, risk, sign
Also: ability, attempt, concern, decision, desire, 
determination, failure, inability, permission, 
proposal, reason, refusal, (un)willingness
Some nouns can be followed by a to-inﬁ nitive but not usually of + -ing:
 His unhappy childhood explains his 
reluctance to talk about his parents. 
Note that many of these nouns can also be 
used with other prepositions + -ing 
(e.g. attempt at -ing, reason for -ing, etc.).
Also: ambition, idea, option, plan.
Unit
187
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 15 (page 249)
93
93. 1  Rewrite the italicised words with a similar meaning using a noun related to the underlined verb. 
Add an appropriate preposition after the noun. A
1  I greatly admire people who work full time and also study for a university degree.  
have great admiration for
2 Yasemin is still in hospital but over the last couple of days her condition has improved. 
3 Rashid is very proud of his cooking, and is always eager to talk about his recipes. 
4 The website advises on how to lose weight. 
5 I hate it when people are cruel to animals, and would support a ban on hunting. 
6  We discussed the relative merits of CDs and records for a long time. 
7 I had to be vaccinated against typhoid before entering the country. 
8  Benny Carter signiﬁ cantly inﬂ uenced  the development of British jazz. 
9  The city lacks affordable housing and many people are homeless. 
 10  There is widespread support for ﬁ reworks to be banned. 
93.2  Complete the sentences with a noun from (i) and either of + -ing or the to-inﬁ nitive form of a 
verb from (ii). B
(i) (ii)
ability  cost decision
failure  fear  possibility
reason  risk sign        
unwillingness  
 acknowledge allow buy
 ﬂ y  get protect
 remember stop transmit
 worry
1 My mother recently overcame her fear of flying  and had a holiday in South Africa.
2 The snow has been falling now for two days and shows no  .
3 The government has defended its  coal mining in the national park.
4 Your blood pressure is a little high, but there is no  about it.
5 She was kept in isolation to reduce the  the virus to other people 
in the hospital.
6 The exercise tests children’s  a random sequence of numbers.
7 The government has been criticised for its  the region from 
ﬂ ooding.
8 The  a new car in Europe is expected to fall in the next year.
9 I knew that there was little  the job with so many applicants.
 10 It’s hard to work with Nik because of his  that he ever makes 
mistakes.
93.3  Complete the sentences with an appropriate verb using either of + -ing or a to-inﬁ nitive. Give 
both forms if both are possible. C
1 Although Mia said she would think about it, she never had the slightest intention 
of accepting  my suggestion.
2 It’s going to be cloudy tonight so there is only a ﬁ fty-ﬁ fty chance  
the eclipse of the moon.
3 It’s pouring with rain. I hope David had the sense  an umbrella 
with him.
4 The head of the company repeated his intention  on his 65th 
birthday.
5 When the History Department closed she was given the option  
another job.
6 Katrin had a very unusual way  , keeping her feet ﬁ rmly on the 
ﬂ oor and waving her arms around her head.
Unit
A
B
C
D
E
F
Two- and three-word verbs: word order
With many transitive two-word verbs, the object can come before or after the adverb:
 I want to try out the local food. or  I want to try the local food out.
Also: bring about, clean up, count out, drink up, gather up, get down, leave out, 
make up, mess up, shoot down, sort out, throw away, use up
However, if the object is a pronoun it must come between the verb and the adverb:
 I won’t be able to go to the party. You’ll have to count me out. (not … count out me.)
and we prefer to put the object after the adverb when the object is long. Compare:
 She had to clean the kitchen up. (or ... clean up the kitchen.) and
 She had to clean up the mess in the kitchen. (rather than ... clean the mess in the kitchen up.)
With some transitive two-word verbs, the object comes between the verb and the adverb:
 I just couldn’t tell the twins apart. (not ... tell apart the twins)
Also: catch out, hear out, order about, pull to, push to, shut up (= to silence), stand up
With some transitive two-word verbs, the object follows the preposition:
 She takes after her mother.  I ﬂ icked through a magazine while I was waiting. 
Also: account for, act on, approve of, call on, check into, look after, provide for, result from,  
run into, take against
With most three-word verbs, the object goes after the 
preposition:
 He really looks up to his older brother. 
However, a few three-word verbs usually have the object immediately after the verb. A second noun 
or noun phrase goes after the preposition:
 She tried to talk me out of the plan. 
Many two-word verbs are usually intransitive:
 He grew up on a farm.  When she came to she found herself in hospital.
Also: crop up, fall through, get up, move off, shop around, splash out
However, some two-word verbs can be used transitively or intransitively with the same meaning:
 I’ll call back later.  I’ll call you back when I get home. 
Also: answer back, clear away, cover up, help out, take over, tidy up, wash up
and other two-word verbs can be used transitively or intransitively with a different meaning:
 The engine cut out and the car came to a stop.  I cut the picture out and kept it. 
Also: break in, hold out, look out, look up, pick up, split up, turn in, wind up
The meaning of some verbs commonly used with a particular preposition or adverb (or particle) is 
often different from the meaning of their separate parts. We can call these two-word verbs:
 I’ll quickly go over the main points of the report again. (= summarise)
 She had to let her dress out because she’d put on weight. (= make it larger)
Other three-word verbs are commonly used with an adverb + preposition.
 Do you think he’s really likely to go through with his threat? (= do it)
 The team has failed to live up to earlier expectations. (= achieve what was expected)
These two- and three-word verbs are sometimes also called phrasal verbs.
188
94
Also: come in for, come up against, 
cut back on, look down on, put up with
Also: do out of, help on with, let in on, 
put down as, put up to, take up on
Unit
189
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 15 (page 249)
94. 1  If possible or necessary, add an appropriate noun or pronoun in the space. B
1 The same problem kept cropping  up, even though I thought I’d ﬁ xed it.
2 I’m not sure how you spell it. I’ll look  up in the dictionary.
3 I’m busy at the moment, but I can help  out this evening.
4 If you tidy  up, I’ll do the cleaning.
5 The deal fell  through because we couldn’t agree a price.
94.2  Show where the word or phrase in brackets should go in each sentence with a  . If it is possible 
to put it in more than one place, mark these two possibilities. C
1 The house is untidy, but I haven’t got time to sort   out now. (it)
2 We’ve introduced a training scheme to bring about. ( some improvement)
3 The strike by airline pilots messed up. ( the holiday I’d spent months planning)
4 I decided to try out for a couple of months. ( the diet)
5 I used up to buy the car. ( all my savings)
6 A:  I must get my shoes repaired again.     
B:  But they’re so old – why don’t you just throw away ? (them)
94.3  Complete each sentence using a two-word verb from (i) and a noun phrase from (ii). If two 
word orders are possible, give both. C & D
(i) (ii)
 get down  leave out make up
 push to  hear out shut up  
the general ideas me my mind
her name the thing  the window 
1 It’s freezing in here. Can you push the window to?  
2 When she ﬁ lled the form in she  , so they 
sent it back to her.
3 The alarm started when I opened the car door, and now I can’t  
 .
4 There were so many desserts on the menu, I couldn’t  
 .
5 I  , but the lecturer spoke so quickly I 
couldn’t follow the details.
6 I know you suspect me of cheating, but you’ve got to give me a chance to explain myself. At 
least  before making up your mind.
94.4  If necessary, correct the word order or give a more likely word order in these sentences. If they 
are already correct, write ✓. D, E & F
1 He was always ordering about everyone, getting them to do his work for him.
2 It is assumed that parents will provide their children for until they are 18.
3 She wouldn’t let in me on the secret, however hard I tried to persuade her.
4 The snow was so heavy that the police called motorists on to avoid unnecessary journeys.
5 I checked into the hotel at about four.
6 I took up Emre on his offer and stayed in his ﬂ at while I was in Ankara.
7 The government has come in for a lot of criticism over its decision to increase spending on 
defence.
8 My parents didn’t approve of our engagement.
9 I had always looked Mr Gao up to, so I was shocked to discover what he had done.
94
Unit
A
B
C
D
There is, there was, etc.
There + be is also used with nouns followed by a that-, wh-, to-inﬁ nitive or -ing clause:
 Is there a chance (that) Kim could arrive this afternoon?
 There is no reason (why) I can’t see you tomorrow.
 There is a small stream which / that runs at the bottom of the garden.
 There was an attempt to resolve the dispute at the factory.
 There was a taxi waiting outside the hotel.
We don’t usually leave out a relative pronoun when it is the subject of the following ﬁ nite verb, but 
can leave it out when it is the object (see Unit 53).
In formal English we can use a clause with there being to introduce a reason for something:
 There being no evidence against him, he was released. (= Because there was no evidence).
 There being no reports of adverse reactions, the drug is to be sold more widely.
The verb be should agree with the noun that comes after it: 
 There is a very good reason for my decision.
 There were too many people trying to get into the football stadium.
However, in informal speech we sometimes use there’s before a plural noun:
 ‘Anything to eat?’ ‘Well, there’s some apples on the table.’
If the noun phrase consists of two or more nouns in a list, we use a singular verb if the ﬁ rst noun is 
singular or uncountable, and a plural verb if the ﬁ rst noun is plural:
 When I opened the fridge there was only a bottle of milk, some eggs, and butter.
 When I opened the fridge there were only some eggs, a bottle of milk, and butter.
When we introduce a new person or thing – to say that this person or thing exists, happens, or is found 
in a particular place – we can use a sentence beginning There + be:
 There was a loud bang from upstairs. (not A loud bang was from upstairs.)
 There’s nothing to eat. (not Nothing is to eat.)
We invert this pattern in questions to ask about the existence etc. of people and things:
 Is there anybody in here?
We can also use there with auxiliary and modal verbs with be (e.g. has been, can be):
 There must be some way of contacting her.
with verb + to be (e.g. used to be, is supposed to be, tends to be, appears to be, seems to be):
 There appears to be a major disagreement between the two presidents.
and some other verbs that indicate existence (e.g. arise, emerge, exist, remain):
 During the 1990s there arose a demand for organic food.
Because we use there in this way to introduce topics, the noun after there + be often has an indeﬁ nite 
or non-speciﬁ c meaning. So we often use a / an, zero article, any(one) (+ noun), or some(thing), 
no(body), etc. rather than the, this, my, your (+ noun), or a name, which give the noun a more 
deﬁ nite or speciﬁ c meaning. Compare:
 There’s nobody here.
 There was something strange about her.  and
 The cat was in the kitchen. (more usual than There was the cat in the kitchen.; but compare 
There was a cat in the kitchen.)
 Jan is waiting for me outside. (more usual than There is Jan waiting for me outside.)
When we use there + be + the, this is often done to show a change of topic. Choosing the, that, etc. 
+ noun indicates that we think the topic is already known to the listener or reader:
 … And then there is the question of who is going to pay.
190
95
Unit
191
Exercises
95. 1  Rewrite these sentences using there only if the answer is likely. Consider why some answers 
are not likely. A
1 Coffee was spilt on the table. There was coffee spilt on the table.  
2 Your dinner is in the oven.  (A sentence with ‘There … ’ is unlikely.)
3 Is something bothering you?
4 A barrier was across the road.
5 The doctor is free to see you now.
6 The problem of what to do with nuclear waste remains.
7 My son is at university.
8 A video is supposed to be on the website, but it doesn’t work. 
9 No petrol was available anywhere in the city.
 10 Can anyone help me?
 11 You can follow some general rules.
 12 An art gallery used to be around here.
95.2  The sentences below are all taken from written English. Which is correct or more likely in the 
space – is or are? A
1 There  two pubs and a church on the village green.
2 There  other possible locations for the car park, but the central one is preferred.
3 There  no direct rail link between the cities.
4 There  further rain and strong winds forecast for the next three days.
5 There  chocolate bars, crisps, and a bottle of cola in the bag if you get hungry.
6 There  substantial evidence to suggest that the Robinsons lied to the police.
7 There  no easy answers to the problem of climate change.
8 There  a shower, television, and two single beds in each room.
95.3  Join the matching sentence halves using an appropriate relative pronoun ( that, which, or who). 
Write the relative pronoun in brackets if it can be left out. C & Unit 53
1 There were a lot of people at the party a  an election will be held next month.
2 There’s a cake in the kitchen b  are harder-working than Kristin.
3 There was never any doubt c  I’ve made especially for your birthday.
4 There have been suggestions d  I could do to prevent him falling.
5 There aren’t many people alive today e  hadn’t been invited. 
6 There are still some old houses in the village f  haven’t watched TV.
7 There was absolutely nothing g  don’t have electricity.
8 There are few people in the company h  Bruno would get the job.
1 + e There were a lot of people at the party who / that hadn’t been invited.
95.4  Write new sentences with similar meanings beginning There being … . D
1 As there was no food in the house, they went to a local restaurant. 
There being no food in the house, they went to a local restaurant.  
2 There was no further business, so the meeting closed at 12:30.
 
3 The patients were sent home because there was no doctor available.
 
4 Because the facilities were inadequate at the hotel, the conference was relocated to a nearby 
university.
 
95
Unit
A
B
C
It … 1
We don’t usually use an it … pattern as an alternative to a noun as subject:
 Their success was unexpected. (not It was unexpected their success.)
However, in informal contexts, particularly in speech, this is quite common in order to give special 
emphasis to the information immediately following it …:
 It tastes really good, this new ice cream.
and also to place a longer noun phrase at the end in order to focus attention on it:
 It’s ridiculous, all the bureaucracy involved in running a school these days.
We often use introductory it with be + adjective / noun (as in the examples above), but other 
patterns with an introductory it are possible. Here are some common examples– 
 it + verb + to-inﬁ nitive 
 ‘I’ve got a terrible headache.’ ‘ It helps to lie down.’ 
 If you want someone to help you, it doesn’t do to 
annoy them just before you ask. (‘[not] do’ = 
(not) advisable, acceptable or enough)  
 it + verb + object + to-inﬁ nitive
 It shocked him to see her looking so ill.
 It means a lot to get a place at university.  
After these verbs the object usually refers to a person. 
We can also use it + take + object + to-inﬁ nitive when we say what is or was needed in a particular 
activity; for example, time, resources or characteristics needed. Compare:
 It takes a lot of effort to play the ﬂ ute. and  To play the ﬂ  ute takes a lot of effort.
 it + verb + that-clause 
 It seems that she has lost her memory.
 It emerged that he already had a criminal record.  
 it + verb + object + that-clause
 It suddenly hit me that Sara wanted to 
borrow money. (less likely is That Sara 
wanted to borrow money suddenly hit me.) 
The object in this pattern usually refers to a person. 
We can use an introductory it at the beginning of a sentence –
 to place long or grammatically complex sentence elements at the end (the usual place for them in 
English). Compare:
 To drive without a licence is illegal. and
 It is illegal to drive without a licence.
 to focus attention on something by putting it at the end (the usual place for new or important 
information in English). Compare:
 That she wasn’t hurt is a miracle. and
 It’s a miracle that she wasn’t hurt.
Introductory it is commonly used when the subject is a to-inﬁ nitive or that-clause (as in the 
examples above), and also when the subject is a wh- or -ing clause (see also Unit 25):
 It is clear why Diego decided to leave Spain.
 It is useless asking Sophie to help.
192
96
Also: hurt, pay (= give an advantage 
or beneﬁ t)
Also:  amaze ,  annoy ,  astonish ,  concern , 
 cost ,  frighten ,  hurt ,  scare ,  surprise , 
 upset ,  worry  (most are to do with feelings) 
Also: appear, come about, follow, 
happen, transpire
Also: dawn on, not bother, strike (= occur to), 
turn out, and the highlighted verbs above
Unit
193
Exercises
96. 1  Rewrite these sentences beginning It … but only if they would be correct written English; 
otherwise write ✓ and consider why an It … sentence would be inappropriate. A & C
1 That we continue to monitor the situation is important.
 It is important that we continue to monitor the situation.
2 How he stared straight at me was unsettling.
3 Francesco’s excellent exam result was surprising.
4 To be a qualiﬁ ed driver is an advantage in the job.
5 Her proposal is quite radical.
6 To put carpet on walls is highly unusual.
7 Robin’s new car is a Ferrari.
8 Finding a good plumber is hard these days.
96.2  Complete the sentences using it … followed by a verb from (i) and an expanded form of the 
notes in (ii). Include an appropriate object where necessary. B
(i) (ii)
 appear  astonish
 not bother concern
 hurt not do
 pay strike
 upset scare  
pedal / bicycle  seriously injured / back 
see / carrying knives  plan your journey ahead
criticise / too much  hadn’t even told / when / going away
everyone / see in  discover / also / successful novelist
he / jealous  hear / offended
1 When Laura fell heavily and lay completely still,
 it appeared that she had seriously injured her back
2 I knew that Lotta was a journalist for the local paper, but …
3 Since I broke my ankle last year, …
4 I told Peter that I had invited Hugo, too. When he became angry …
5 My comment about Ben’s baldness was only meant as a joke and …
6 There were no curtains in his house, but …
7 I didn’t mind Amy not asking me to go on holiday with her, but …
8 Children need a lot of praise and …
9 The boys walked towards me in a threatening way, and …
 10 You can save money by booking tickets in advance, so …
96.3  What personal or physical characteristics are needed to …? Use It takes … in your answers. B
1 play a musical instrument well
 It takes a lot of determination to play a musical instrument well.
2 build your own house 
 
3 make a speech in front of a group of strangers 
 
4 explain the rules of cricket to someone who doesn’t know the game 
 
 Now suggest completions for these sentences.
5 It takes bravery … 
 
6 It takes a lot of organisation to … 
 
7 It takes a great deal of time … 
 
96
Unit
A
B
C
D
It … 2
With the verbs accept, regard, see, take (= interpret something in a particular way), or view we use it 
+ as + noun (or adjective) + clause:
 We see it as an insult to have received no reply to our letter.
 I take it as encouraging when students attend all my lectures.
It is / was no … vs There is / was no …
Here are some common expressions including It is / was no … and There is / was no …:
 It’s no secret that he wants a new job.
 It’s no surprise that his latest ﬁ lm has 
been so successful.
 It’s no use telling me now. I needed to 
know a week ago.
 It’s no good getting angry. That won’t 
help solve the problem.
 It’s no coincidence (or accident) that 
they left the party at the same time.
 It’s no longer necessary to have a visa to 
visit the country.
 There’s no denying that he’s intelligent.
 I’m afraid there’s no alternative (or 
choice) but to ask her to leave.
 There’s no hope of getting more money.
 There’s no need to explain how it works; 
I’ll read the manual.
 There’s no point in buying an ice-cream 
maker unless you plan to use it a lot. 
 There’s no question of agreeing to his 
demands.
 There’s no reason to be pessimistic.
 There’s no chance of ﬁ nding a cure if we 
don’t fund more research.
The sentences with It is / was no … have alternatives in which the that-, -ing or to-inﬁ nitive clause 
is placed at the front, but the sentences with There is / was no … do not. Compare:
 It’s no secret that he wants a new job. (or That he wants a new job is no secret.) and
 There’s no denying that he’s intelligent. (but not That he’s intelligent is no denying.)
With other verbs used to indicate how we see a particular event or situation, it is followed ﬁ rst by an 
adjective or noun phrase and then a that-clause, to-inﬁ nitive clause, or clause beginning when: 
 Ofﬁ  cials said they believe it unlikely that any 
lasting damage to the environment has been 
done. (or ... they believe it is unlikely that ...; 
not ... they believe unlikely that ...) 
When we use leave and owe (= have a responsibility to) with it we can use to somebody + to-
inﬁ nitive after it:
 Don’t bother to arrange anything. Just leave it to me to sort out. 
 She owed it to her parents to do well at college.
We can use a pattern with it as the object of a verb where it refers forward to a clause. It can 
sometimes be followed directly by a that-, if- or when-clause after can’t bear, hate, like, love, 
resent and can’t stand, and by an if- or when-clause after dislike, enjoy, prefer and understand:
 I hate it that you can swim so well and I can’t. (not I hate that you can swim ...)
 We always enjoy it when they stay with us. (not We always enjoy when they ...)
Some verbs can be followed by it and a that-clause, particularly in spoken English, or directly by a 
that-clause without it:
 You’ve just got to accept (it) that Emil’s gone 
and won’t be coming back. 
Many other verbs that can be followed by a that -clause or wh-clause are not used with it in this way:
 I can’t remember when I last saw her. 
(not ... remember it when ...)
194
97
Also: admit, deny, guarantee, mention
Also: consider, feel, ﬁ nd (= discover 
something from experience), think
Also: argue, discover, emphasise, notice, predict
Unit
195
Exercises
97.1  Complete each sentence with an appropriate form of a verb from the box. If necessary, add it. 
A & B
 can’t bear         consider            discover            enjoy            ﬁ nd
leave            owe            predict            prefer            remember
1 She can’t bear it  when people criticise her work, and she gets very upset.
2 I  hard to understand why the ﬁ lm was made in black and white and not colour.
3 If you  that you can’t get to the meeting on the 16th I’ll try to rearrange it.
4 We  to our supporters to play to the best of our ability in the match.
5 I  that the camera was on the table when I left the house.
6 I really  when the weather’s hot like this. I’d hate to live in a cold climate.
7 I can’t stop you dismantling your motorbike in the kitchen, but I’d  if you didn’t.
8 I think we should  to the children to do the washing up.
9 I  that Randa will withdraw from the course within a month.
 10 I  a privilege to have known Mark Jennings.
97.2  Here are some notes a managing director made for his ﬁ rst speech to the board of directors. In 
the speech he expanded the notes beginning I + (verb) + it as …, using the verbs in brackets. 
Write what he said. C
1  (take)
97
 I take it as a great honour to be asked to become managing director of Rexco.
2  (see)
97.3  Complete the sentences with an appropriate it … or there … phrase from section D opposite. 
Suggest alternatives where possible. D
1 It’s no coincidence  that Karlsbad has won the ice hockey tournament for the last three 
years. It is a very rich club and its training facilities are excellent.
2 My contact lens must have fallen out in the snow, so  of ﬁ nding it.
3  that Julia and Jakub have split up. Everyone in the ofﬁ ce knows.
4 I know your exam result wasn’t good, but  getting depressed about it.
5 Your broken arm will take some time to mend, but  why you 
shouldn’t be playing tennis again by the summer.
6 As the car ferry isn’t running because of the high winds,  but to drive 
100 kilometres around the lake.
7  possible to buy tickets at the theatre. You have to buy them online. 
8 Bungee jumping might be dangerous, but  that it’s very exciting.
great honour – asked to become – managing director – Rexco
part of my role – signiﬁ  cantly reduce Rexco’s carbon footprint – next 5 years
3  (accept)
necessary evil – some people – may redundant – in next year
5  (regard)
unacceptable – modern company – exclude workforce – major decision-making
4  (view)
important for relations with workforce – make available information – 
managers’ salaries
6  (take)
fundamental principle of company – suppliers of raw materials
– given fair price for products
Unit
A
B
C
Focusing: it-clauses and what-clauses
Focusing with what-clauses
We can also use a what-clause followed by be to focus attention on certain information in a 
sentence (= another form of cleft sentence). This pattern is particularly common in conversation. The 
information we want to focus attention on is outside the what-clause. Compare:
 We gave them some home-made cake. and
 What we gave them was some home-made cake.
We often do this if we want to introduce a new topic; to give a reason, instruction or explanation; or to 
correct something that has been said or done. In the following examples, the information in focus is in 
italics:
 What I’d like you to work on is the revision exercise on the website. 
 Isa arrived two hours late: what had happened was that his bicycle chain had broken.
 ‘We’ve only got this small bookcase – will that do?’ ‘No, what I was looking for was 
something much bigger and stronger.’
We can often put the what-clause either at the beginning or the end of the sentence:
 What upset me most was his rudeness. or
 His rudeness was what upset me most.
To focus attention on an action performed by someone, we use a sentence with what + subject + do 
+ be + to-inﬁ nitive clause. We can’t use an it-clause to do this (see A):
 Luis lost his job and was short of money, so what he did was (to) sell his ﬂ at and move in 
with his brother. (not … so it was (to) sell his ﬂ at that he did.)
The pattern in B is only usually used with what-clauses. Instead of placing other wh-clauses 
(beginning how, when, where, who, why) at the beginning of the sentence we prefer to use a noun 
which has a meaning related to the wh-word (e.g. reason rather than why; place rather than where) 
followed by a that- or wh-clause. Here are some examples:
 The only reason (why / that) I left the party early was that I was feeling unwell. (rather than 
Why I left the party early was …)
 The place (where / that) you should play football is the playground, not the classroom. 
 Somebody (who / that) I enjoy reading is Peter Carey. 
 The time (when / that) I work best is early morning.
Focusing with it-clauses
We can use an it-clause with be to focus attention on the information that immediately follows 
it + (be). A sentence like this is sometimes called a cleft sentence. The clause after the it-clause 
(usually a that-clause) contains information that is already known or considered to be less important:
 ‘Lea bought the car from Olav.’ ‘No, it was Olav that bought the car from Lea.’
 I don’t mind her criticising me, but it’s how she does it that I object to.
 It was to show how much I cared for her that I bought her the necklace.
We sometimes use which or who instead of that; when and where can also be used, but usually only 
in informal English; and note that how or why can’t replace that:
 Karl was always there to help her, and it was to him that / who she now turned for support.
 ‘Ida’s seriously ill in hospital.’ ‘But it was only last Sunday when / that I was playing tennis 
with her.’
 It was in Warsaw where / that the ﬁ lm was made.
 ‘Was it by cutting staff that he managed to save the ﬁ  rm?’ ‘No, it was by improving 
distribution that he made it proﬁ table.’ (not … how he made it proﬁ table.)
196
98
Unit
197
Exercises
98. 1  Complete the rewritten sentences to focus attention on the underlined information. Start with 
it + be and use an appropriate wh-word or that. A
1 Mark’s known for ages that his parents are coming to stay with us this weekend, but he only told 
me yesterday. Mark’s known for ages that his parents are coming to stay with us this weekend, 
but … it was only yesterday that / when he told me.
2 Helena has been feeling a bit depressed for some time, so I booked a holiday in Amsterdam to 
cheer her up. Helena has been feeling a bit depressed for some time, so …
3 It’s not that I don’t want to have dinner with you tonight; I can’t come because I’ve got so much 
work to do. It’s not that I don’t want to have dinner with you tonight; …
4 I had my wallet when I went into the sports hall, so I lost it somewhere in there. I had my wallet 
when I went into the sports hall, so …
5 She doesn’t ﬁ nd learning languages very easy, and she improved her Spanish only by studying 
very hard. She doesn’t ﬁ nd learning languages very easy, and …
6 I have had a great deal of help from my parents and two brothers in my research, and I dedicate 
this thesis to my family. I have had a great deal of help from my parents and two brothers in doing 
my research, and …
98.2  Write B’s responses beginning No, what …, correcting what was said in A’s question. Use the 
notes in brackets. B
1 A: Did you say that Rudi was going to live in Austria? ( holiday / Austria)
 B: No, what I said was that he was going on holiday to Austria.
2 A: Do you hope to sell your Picasso paintings? ( be put into / public art gallery)
 B:  .
3 A: Did it annoy you that Carla came so late? ( not apologise)
 B:   .
4 A: Did you mean to give Ella your bike? ( could borrow it / until needed again)
 B:  .
 Now give similar responses which focus on the action.
5 A: Did you watch the football on TV last night? ( get brother / record it /  watch tonight)
 B: No, what I did was (to) get my brother to record it and I’ll watch it tonight.
6 A: This steak tastes delicious. Did you fry it? ( put oil and soy sauce on /  grill)
 B:  .
7 A: Did you buy Megan the coat she wanted? ( give / money towards it)
 B:  .
8 A: Did you ﬂ y from Sydney to Brisbane. (hire a car / drive all the way)
 B:  .
98.3  Complete B’s responses using one of the phrases from section C opposite and the information 
in brackets. Put the information in the right order and add an appropriate form of be. C
1 A: I suppose Paul got the job because of his qualiﬁ cations. (uncle owns company)   
 B: Well, actually, I think … the reason why / that Paul got the job was that his
 uncle owns the company.
2 A: Do you know anyone who could mend my computer? ( might be able /  help /  Petra)   
 B: I don’t know if she’s free, but 
   .
3 A: You grew up in this village, didn’t you? ( between this village and next)   
 B: In fact 
   .
4 A: In what period of your life do you think you were happiest? ( lived Australia)   
 B: I suppose 
   .
98
Unit
A
B
C
D
Inversion 1
We can use clauses with inversion instead of certain kinds of if-clause (see Unit 83). Compare:
 It would be a serious setback, if the talks 
were to fail.
 It would be a serious setback, were the talks 
to fail.
 If you should need more information, please 
telephone our main ofﬁ ce.
 Should you need more information, please 
telephone our main ofﬁ ce.
 If Andy had asked, I would have been able 
to help.
 Had Andy asked, I would have been able to 
help.
The sentences with inversion are rather more formal than those with ‘if’. Note that in negative clauses 
with inversion, we don’t use contracted forms:
 Had the plane not been diverted, they would have arrived early. (not Hadn’t the plane …)
In formal written language we commonly use inversion after as and than in comparisons:
 Paper was invented in China, as was the process of printing. 
 Most young people did not vote in the election, as was the case in 2010. 
 I believed, as did my colleagues, that the plan would work. 
 Research shows that parents watch more television than do their children. 
Note that we don’t invert subject and verb after as or than when the subject is a pronoun:
 We now know a lot more about the universe than we did ten years ago. (not … than did we 
ten years ago.)
In conversation we use Here comes + noun and There goes + noun, with inversion of verb and 
subject, to talk about things and people moving towards or away from the speaker:
 Here comes the bus.
 There goes Per Alvin, the conductor. 
Here comes … is also used to say that something is going to happen soon, and There goes … is used 
to talk about things (particularly money) being lost and to say that something (such as a phone or 
door bell) is ringing:
 Here comes lunch.
 My bike’s been stolen! There goes £100!
 There goes the phone. Can you answer it?
We also put the verb before the subject when we use adverbs expressing direction of movement, such 
as along, away, back, down, in, off, out, up with verbs such as come, ﬂ y, go. This pattern is found 
particularly in narrative, to mark a change in events:
 The door opened and in came the doctor. (less formally … and the doctor came in.)
 As soon as I let go of the string, up went the balloon, high into the sky. (less formally … the 
balloon went up …)
For more on inversion after adverbs of place and direction, see Unit 76A.
In statements it is usual for the verb to follow the subject, but sometimes this word order is reversed. 
We can refer to this as inversion. There are two main types of inversion: when the verb comes before 
the subject (inversion is often optional), and when the auxiliary comes before the subject and the rest 
of the verb phrase follows the subject (inversion is usually necessary):
 Alex stood in the doorway. → In the doorway stood Alex. (or … Alex stood.)
 I had rarely seen such a view. → Rarely had I seen such a view. (not Rarely I had seen …)
Inversion brings about fronting, the re-ordering of information in a sentence to give emphasis in a 
particular place. Often this causes an element to be postponed until later in the sentence, focusing 
attention on it.
198
99
Unit
199
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 16 (page 250)
99. 1  Complete the sentences with an appropriate adverb and a form of either come or go. B
1 We’d just got to the top of the hill when down came  the rain and we got soaked.
2 Just when you’ve bought a computer that you think will last a lifetime,  some 
new software that needs an even bigger hard drive.
3 Whenever I ask the class a question,  their hands and they sit patiently until I 
choose one of them to answer.
4 I asked Ryan to get three kilos of potatoes from the supermarket and he only bought one kilo, so 
 he  to get some more.
5 After I’d been waiting for an hour, the door opened and  the nurse, who said the 
dentist would be able to see me now.
6 I‘d lost hope of getting the cat out of the tree, when  a man with a ladder.
7 As soon as I’d given Daisy some pocket money,  she to buy sweets.
99.2  Match the sentence halves and write new sentences beginning Were …, Should …, or Had … . C
1 If Kahn had not resigned as party leader, … a  it would cut the journey time from New York 
2 If you do not wish to receive further    to Tokyo by four hours.
 information about our products, … b  there are less expensive models in the range.
3 If the plane were ever to be built, … c  he would have been sacked. 
4 If the ice hockey team wins again today, … d  I would have no hesitation in accepting.
5 If I were offered the job, … e  he would be writing novels about the 
6 If a car had been coming the other way, …   homeless in London.
7 If there had been a referendum on the issue, …  f  it is unlikely that the electorate would have 
8 If you are not able to afford the SXL3, …   supported the government.
9 If Charles Dickens were alive today,… g  it will be their tenth consecutive victory.
   h  click on the box below.
   i  I might have been seriously injured.
1 + c Had Kahn not resigned as party leader, he would have been sacked.
99.3  Report the information in the table. Write three sentences using sentence frame (i) and three 
using sentence frame (ii). 
Household expenditure (% of total income)
Housing Food and drink Clothing Transport Recreation
Europe 1970 22 12 3 8 10
America 1970 15 14 2 6 12
Europe Today 17 8 5 12 9
America Today 16 15 3 7 13
(i)  Europeans / Americans   spend / spent   more / less   of their income on … today / in 1970   than   
do / did   Europeans / Americans
 1 Americans spend more of their income on food and drink today than do Europeans.
(ii)  Europeans / Americans   spend / spent   more / less   of their income on … than on … today / in 
1970,   as is / was the case   today /  in 1970.
99.4  Rewrite these sentences with a similar meaning using as or than + be or do. D
1 I was opposed to the new road. Everyone else in the village was opposed to it, too. 
I was opposed to the new road, as was everyone else in the village.
2 Kamal went to Oxford University. His sister went there, too.  Kamal went …
3 Compared with people in developed nations, people in poorer countries consume a far smaller 
proportion of the earth’s resources. People in poorer countries …
4 Compared to ﬁ ve years ago, he is a much better teacher. He is …
5 Dan is a keen golfer. His wife is a keen golfer, too. Dan is …
99
B Inversion after so + adjective … that; such + be … that; neither … / nor …
We can use so + adjective at the beginning of a clause to emphasise the adjective. When we do this, 
the subject and ﬁ rst auxiliary are inverted, and do is used with a simple tense verb:
 So successful was her business, that Lana was able to retire at the age of 50.
 So dangerous did weather conditions become, that all mountain roads were closed.
We can use such + be at the beginning of a clause to emphasise the extent or degree of something:
 Such is the popularity of the play that the theatre is likely to be full every night. 
We use inversion after neither and nor when these words begin a clause to introduce a negative 
addition to a previous negative clause or sentence:
 For some time after the explosion Jack couldn’t hear, and neither could he see.
 The council never wanted the new supermarket to be built, nor did local residents.
Note that we also use inversion in Neither / Nor do I, Neither / Nor does Diane (etc.) and in So do I, 
So does Maya (etc.).
Unit
A
Inversion 2
Inversion after negative adverbials
In formal and literary language in particular, we use negative adverbials at the beginning of a clause. 
The subject and ﬁ rst auxiliary are inverted, and do is used with a simple tense verb after –
 the time adverbials never (before), rarely, seldom; barely / hardly / scarcely … when / before; no 
sooner … than:
 Seldom do we have goods returned to us because they are faulty.
 Hardly had everybody taken their seats when Dr Lee began her lecture.
 only + a time expression, as in only after, only later, only if, only once, only then, only when:
 She bought a newspaper and some milk at the shop on the corner. Only later did she realise 
that she’d been given the wrong change.
 Only when she apologises will I speak to her again.
 only + other prepositional phrases beginning only by …, only in …, only with …, etc.:
 Only by chance had Carl discovered where the birds were nesting.
 Maria had to work in the evenings. Only in this way was she able to complete the report.
 expressions such as at no time, in no way, on no account, under / in no circumstances:
 At no time did they actually break the rules of the game.
 Under no circumstances are passengers permitted to open the doors themselves.
 expressions with not …, such as not only, not until, not since, not for one moment and also not a + 
noun:
 Not until August did the government order an inquiry into the accident.
 Not a word had she written since the exam had started.
 little with a negative meaning:
 Little do they know how lucky they are to live in such a wonderful house. (= ‘they don’t 
know’ or ‘they don’t know sufﬁ ciently’)
Note that inversion can occur after a clause beginning only after / if / when or not until:
 Only when the famine gets worse will world governments begin to act.
 Not until the train pulled into the station did Miguel ﬁ nd that his coat had gone.
200
100
Unit
201
Exercises
➜ Additional exercise 16 (page 250)
100
100. 1 Rewrite the sentences with a similar meaning beginning with a word / phrase from the box. A
only if        barely        only with         rarely         at no time        little
1 A new ﬁ  lm has not often before produced such positive reviews.
 Rarely has a new film produced such positive reviews.
2 The public was never in any danger.
3 He only felt entirely relaxed with close friends and family.
4 The match won’t be cancelled unless the pitch is frozen.
5 I didn’t know then that Carmen and I would be married one day.
6 He had only just entered the water when it became clear he couldn’t swim.
 Now do the same using these words and phrases. A
only once        only in        on no account        hardly        not only        not for one moment
7 You must not light the ﬁ re if you are alone in the house.
8 There was never any rivalry between the three brothers.
9 I wasn’t only wet through, I was freezing cold.
 10 I had only ever climbed this high once before.
 11 The audience had only just taken their seats when the conductor stepped onto the stage.
 12 He has only been acknowledged to be a great author in the last few years.
100.2  Complete these sentences in any appropriate way using the words from the box. B
alike        boring        complicated        dominance         interest         strength
1 Such is the interest in Dr Lowe’s talk  that it will be held in a bigger lecture theatre.
2 Such  that few buildings were left standing.
3 Such  that she hasn’t lost a match for over three years.
4 So  that even their parents couldn’t tell them apart.
5 So  that it even took a computer three days to solve it.
6 So  that most of the students went to sleep.
100.3  Correct any mistakes in this news article. Units 99 & 100
TOWN EV ACUATED AS FOREST FIRES APPROACH
The people of Sawston were evacuated yesterday as forest ﬁres headed towards the town. Such the 
heat was of the oncoming inferno that trees more than 100 metres ahead began to smoulder. Only once 
in recent years, during 2004, a town of this size has had to be evacuated because of forest ﬁres. A ﬂeet 
of coaches and lorries arrived in the town in the early morning. Into these vehicles the sick and elderly 
climbed, before they headed off to safety across the river. Residents with cars left by mid morning, as 
all non-essential police ofﬁcers did.
Hardly the evacuation had been completed when the wind changed direction and it became clear that 
the ﬁre would leave Sawston untouched. Soon after that were heard complaints from some residents. 
‘At no time the ﬁres posed a real threat,’ said one local man. ‘I didn’t want to leave my home, and nor 
most of my neighbours did.’ So upset some elderly residents are that they are threatening to complain 
to their MP . But Chief Fire Ofﬁcer Jones replied, ‘Hadn’t we taken this action, lives would have been put 
at risk. Only when the ﬁres have moved well away from the town residents will be allowed to return to 
their homes.’
NEWSONLINE
202
Appendix 1
Irregular verbs
bare inﬁ nitive past simple past participle 
(-ed form)
arise arose arisen
awake awoke awoken
be was / were been
bear bore borne
beat beat beaten
become became become
begin began begun
bend bent bent
bet bet bet
bind bound bound
bite bit bitten
bleed bled bled
blow blew blown
break broke broken
bring brought brought
broadcast broadcast broadcast
build built built
burn1 burnt burnt
burst burst burst
buy bought bought
cast cast cast
catch caught caught
choose chose chosen
cling clung clung
come came come
cost cost cost
creep crept crept
cut cut cut
deal dealt dealt
dig dug dug
dive dived dived
do did done
draw drew drawn
dream1 dreamt dreamt
drink drank drunk
drive drove driven
dwell1 dwelt dwelt
eat ate eaten
fall fell fallen
feed fed fed
feel felt felt
ﬁ ght fought fought
bare inﬁ nitive past simple past participle 
(-ed form)
ﬁ nd found found
ﬁ t1 ﬁ tﬁ  t
ﬂ ee ﬂ ed ﬂ  ed
ﬂ ing ﬂ ung ﬂ  ung
ﬂ y ﬂ ew ﬂ  own
forbid forbade2 forbidden
forecast1 forecast forecast
forget forgot forgotten
forgive forgave forgiven
freeze froze frozen
get got got
give gave given
go went gone
grow grew grown
hang1 hung hung
have had had
hear heard heard
hide hid hidden
hit hit hit
hold held held
hurt hurt hurt
keep kept kept
kneel1 knelt knelt
knit1 knit knit
know knew known
lay laid laid
lead led led
lean1 leant leant
leap1 leapt leapt
learn1 learnt learnt
leave left left
lend lent lent
let let let
lie4 lay lain
light1 lit lit
lose lost lost
make made made
mean meant meant
meet met met
mow3 mowed mown
pay paid paid
prove proved proven
203
Appendix 1
bare inﬁnitive past simple past participle  
(-ed form)
put put put
quit quit quit
read read5 read5
ride rode ridden
ring rang rung
rise rose risen
run ran run
saw3 sawed sawn
say said said
see saw seen
seek sought sought
sell sold sold
send sent sent
set set set
sew3 sewed sewn
shake shook shaken
shear3 sheared shorn
shed shed shed
shine shone shone
shoot shot shot
show showed shown
shrink shrank shrunk
shut shut shut
sing sang sung
sink sank sunk
sit sat sat
sleep slept slept
slide slid slid
sling slung slung
smell1 smelt smelt
sow3 sowed sown
speak spoke spoken
speed1 sped sped
spell1 spelt spelt
spend spent spent
spill1 spilt spilt
bare inﬁnitive past simple past participle  
(-ed form)
spin spun spun / span
spit spat spat
split split split
spoil1 spoilt spoilt
spread spread spread
spring sprang sprung
stand stood stood
steal stole stolen
stick stuck stuck
sting stung stung
stink stank stunk
strike struck struck
strive strove striven
swear swore sworn
sweep swept swept
swell3 swelled swollen
swim swam swum
swing swung swung
take took taken
teach taught taught
tear tore torn
tell told told
think thought thought
throw threw thrown
thrust thrust thrust
tread trod trodden
understand understood understood
wake1 woke woken
wear wore worn
weave1 wove woven
weep wept wept
wet1 wet wet
win won won
wind wound wound
wring wrung wrung
write wrote written
1  These verbs have two past simple and two past participle forms, both the ones given and regular forms 
(e.g. burn; burnt / burned; burnt / burned).
2 ‘forbad’ is also sometimes used, but is old fashioned.
3  These verbs have two past participle forms, the one given and a regular form (e.g. mow; mowed; mown /  
mowed).
4 When lie means ‘deliberately to say something untrue’ it is regular (‘lie / lied / lied’).
5 Pronounced /red/ .
204
Appendix 2
Passive verb forms
If an agent is mentioned, it goes in a prepositional phrase with by after the verb (see also Unit 24).
Present simple
Active: tell(s) John tells me that you’re thinking of leaving.
Passive: am / is / are told I’m told (by John) that you’re thinking of leaving.
Past simple
Active: told John told me that you were leaving.
Passive: was / were told I was told (by John) that you were leaving.
Present perfect 
Active: have / has told John has told me that you are leaving.
Passive: have / has been told I have been told (by John) that you are leaving.
Past perfect
Active:  had told John had already told me that you were leaving.
Passive: had been told I had already been told (by John) that you were leaving.
Present continuous 
Active: am / is / are telling John is always telling me that you are leaving.
Passive: am / is / are being told I am always being told (by John) that you are leaving.
Past continuous 
Active: was / were telling John was always telling me that you were leaving.
Passive: was / were being told I was always being told (by John) that you were leaving.
Future simple
Active: will tell I will tell John that you are leaving. 
Passive: will be told John will be told (by me) that you are leaving.
Future perfect
Active: will have told By tomorrow I will have told John that you are leaving.
Passive: will have been told  By tomorrow John will have been told (by me) that you are 
leaving.
Present perfect continuous (rare in the passive)
Active: has / have been telling John has been telling me for ages that you are leaving.
Passive: has / have been being told I have been being told (by John) for ages that you are leaving.
Modal verbs with passives
Active: should / could / might / ought to (etc.) tell You should tell John.
Passive: should / could / might / ought to (etc.) be told John should be told.
Active: should / could / might / ought to (etc.) have told You should have told John.
Passive: should / could / might / ought to (etc.) have been told John should have been told.
Active: should / could / might / ought to (etc.) have  You should have been 
 been telling telling John while I was outside.
Passive: should / could / might / ought to (etc.) have been  John should have been being 
 being told told  while I was outside.
Other passive verb forms are very rare.

205
active
In an active clause or active sentence, the grammatical subject is the person or thing that performs the 
action given in the verb (e.g. Dan wrote the book). Compare PASSIVE.
adjective 
A word that describes a noun (e.g. an interesting book) or a pronoun (e.g. a red one). Gradable adjectives 
can be used to say that a person or thing has more or less of this quality (e.g. She’s very happy), while non-
gradable adjectives can’t (e.g. It’s impossible. We can’t say ‘It’s very impossible’). Classifying adjectives 
say that something is of a particular type (e.g. atomic, initial). Emphasising adjectives stress how strongly 
we feel about something (e.g. complete nonsense). Qualitative adjectives say what qualities a person or 
thing has (e.g. big, rich). See also grading ADVERBS and non-grading ADVERBS.
adjective phrase 
A group of words where the main word is an adjective (e.g. it’s extremely important; it wasn’t strong enough).
adverb
A word that describes or gives more information (when, how, where, etc.) about a verb (e.g. He ran quickly), 
adjective (e.g. an extremely expensive car), another adverb (e.g. She did it very easily), or phrase (e.g. They 
live just across the road.). Types of adverb include: adverbs of manner (e.g. slowly, violently) which we 
use to say how something is done; connecting adverbs (e.g. consequently, similarly); time adverbs (e.g. 
tomorrow, already); place adverbs (e.g. upstairs, outside); direction adverbs (e.g. backwards, through); 
comment adverbs (e.g. apparently, personally) which we use to make a comment on what we are saying; 
viewpoint adverbs (e.g. ﬁ nancially, politically) which we use to make clear from what point of view we are 
speaking; adverbs of indeﬁ nite frequency (e.g. always, never); degree adverbs (e.g. completely, quite) 
which give information about the extent or degree of something; focus adverbs (e.g. just, even) which we 
use to focus on a particular word or phrase. Grading adverbs (e.g. extremely, very) are used with gradable 
ADJECTIVES. Non-grading adverbs (e.g. completely, mainly) are used with non-gradable ADJECTIVES.
adverbial
A word or group of words that says when, how, where, etc. something happens. They may consist of an 
ADVERB (e.g. quietly), a PREPOSITIONAL PHRASE (e.g. through the door), a NOUN PHRASE (e.g. next week), or an 
ADVERBIAL CLAUSE (e.g. after she left). 
adverbial clause
A type of subordinate CLAUSE that says when, how, where, etc. something happens (e.g. Before I went to 
school this morning, I did my homework).
afﬁ rmative sentence 
A statement (i.e. not a question) that is positive, not negative.
agent
The person or thing that performs the action described in a verb. Usually it is the subject in an active clause 
and comes after ‘by ...’ in a passive clause.
article
The word the is the deﬁ nite article and the word a (an before vowels) is the indeﬁ nite article. When there 
is no article before a noun we refer to this as the zero article.
auxiliary verbs
The verbs be, have and do when they are used with a main verb to form questions, negatives, tenses, passive 
forms, etc. MODAL VERBS are also auxiliary verbs.
Glossary
206
Glossary
clause  
A group of words that contains a verb. A clause may be a complete sentence or a part of a sentence. A main 
clause can exist as a separate sentence, while a subordinate clause cannot (e.g. If I see Matt at work [= 
subordinate clause], I’ll invite him over this evening [= main clause]). Types of clause include: to-inﬁnitive 
clause (e.g. To become a doctor takes years of study); present participle(-ing) clause (e.g. Feeling hungry, 
I went into the kitchen); past participle (-ed) clause (e.g. Built during the 1970s, the building is now in 
need of repair); being + past participle (-ed) clause (e.g. Being unemployed, Tom had a lot of time on his 
hands); having + past participle (-ed) clause (e.g. Having seen the doctor, I went straight home). See also 
CONDITIONAL CLAUSE, RELATIVE CLAUSE. 
cleft sentence 
A sentence in which focus is given to either the subject or object using a pattern beginning ‘It ...’ (e.g. It was 
my brother who lent me the money) or ‘What ...’ (e.g. What you need is a holiday).
complement  
A word or phrase that follows a LINKING VERB and describes the SUBJECT (e.g. Linda is a lawyer) or OBJECT (e.g. I 
found the food inedible). A complement may also be an ADVERBIAL or PREPOSITIONAL PHRASE which completes 
the meaning of a verb. Some verbs need a complement (e.g. The disease originated in Britain; ‘The disease 
originated’ would be incomplete).
compound 
A compound noun consists of two or more words together used as a noun (e.g. a language school). A 
compound adjective consists of two or more words together used as an adjective (e.g. They were well-
behaved).
conditional 
A conditional clause usually starts with ‘if’, but other patterns are possible (e.g. Had it not rained, Spain 
would have won). A conditional sentence contains a conditional clause. A distinction can be made 
between real conditionals, which suggest that the situation is or was true, or may have been or may 
become true (e.g. If she makes a promise, she keeps it) and unreal conditionals, which suggest that the 
situation is imaginary or untrue (e.g. If you had asked me, I would have helped). 
conjunction  
A word such as and, but, if, while, after, because which connects words, phrases, or clauses in a sentence. 
Compare SENTENCE CONNECTOR.
countable 
A countable noun can be both singular and plural (e.g. cup / cups). An uncountable noun doesn’t have a 
plural form (e.g. electricity, but not ‘electricities’). 
determiner  
A word that goes in front of a noun to identify what the noun refers to (e.g. this, some, the, a / an, each, all, 
my). Possessive determiners (also called possessive adjectives) are words such as my, your and their.
direct speech
Speech that is written using the exact words of the speaker, without any changes. Compare REPORTED 
SPEECH.
imperative  
An imperative clause uses the bare INFINITIVE form of a verb for such things as giving orders and making 
suggestions (e.g. Go to bed!).
inﬁnitive 
The form of a verb that usually goes after ‘to’. The form can be either the to-inﬁnitive (e.g. to sing, to eat) 
or the bare inﬁnitive (e.g. sing, eat). 
intransitive verb 
A verb that doesn’t take an object (e.g. She smiled). Compare TRANSITIVE VERB.
207
Glossary
inversion
Changing the usual word order so that the verb comes before the subject (e.g. Up went the balloon).
linking verb 
A verb (e.g. be, become, appear) that connects a SUBJECT with its COMPLEMENT. 
modal verbs 
A group of verbs (can, could, may, might, must, ought to, shall, should, will, would) that give information 
about such things as possibility, necessity, and obligation. Semi-modal verbs (used to, need, dare, had 
better, have (got) to, be able to) have similar meanings to modal verbs. 
non-afﬁrmative
Referring to a lack of positive, afﬁrmative meaning; for example, in most questions and negatives. However, 
questions which expect a positive reply are afﬁrmative. The terms ‘non-assertive’ and ‘assertive’ are 
sometimes used for ‘non-afﬁrmative’ and ‘afﬁrmative’.
noun 
A word that refers to a person, place, thing, quality, etc. A collective noun refers to a group of people or 
things (e.g. audience, crowd, herd). See also COUNTABLE NOUN.
noun phrase 
A group of words where the main word is a noun (e.g. I’ve been talking to the woman across the road; We 
spoke to several small children).
object 
The direct object is the person or thing affected by the action of the verb (e.g. I put the book [= direct 
object] back on the shelf). The indirect object is the person or thing who beneﬁts from the action or who 
receives something (e.g. I gave my mother [= indirect object] some ﬂowers [= direct object]). Compare 
SUBJECT. 
participle 
The present participle is the -ing form of a verb (e.g. walking, singing, eating) used, for example, in 
continuous tenses. The past participle is the -ed form of a verb (e.g. walked, sang, eaten) used, for example, 
in perfect tenses. A participle adjective is one formed from the present or past participle of a verb (e.g. the 
candidates applying, a broken plate). A participle clause has a present participle or past participle verb form 
(e.g. Feeling unwell, he went to bed; The person appointed to the post will have a difﬁcult job to do). 
particle 
An adverb or preposition that follows a verb in TWO-WORD VERBS and THREE-WORD VERBS (e.g. What time did 
you get in? [in = adverb]; I ﬂicked through the magazine [through = preposition]; She looks up to her mother 
[up = adverb, to = preposition]).
passive 
In a passive clause or passive sentence, the grammatical subject is the person or thing that experiences the 
effect of the action given in the verb (e.g. The book was written by Dan). Compare ACTIVE.
performative  
A performative is a verb which states the action that is performed when a speaker uses the verb (e.g. I 
promise I’ll do it tomorrow; I apologise).
phrasal verb 
A verb together with a following adverb and / or a preposition that has a single meaning (e.g. set off, look up 
to). Compare ‘I ran across Tanya at the concert’ (= met unexpectedly; a phrasal verb) and ‘She ran across the 
road’ (= a PREPOSITIONAL VERB).
possessive
The possessive form of a noun ends in either -’s (e.g. Marta’s car) or -s’ (e.g. the girls’ changing room).
preposition 
A word such as in, on, or by that comes before a noun, pronoun, noun phrase or -ing form (e.g. in March, 
above my uncle’s head, by investing).
208
Glossary
prepositional phrase 
A group of words that consists of a PREPOSITION and its prepositional object (a noun, pronoun, noun phrase 
or -ing form) (e.g. behind our house, across it).
prepositional verb 
A verb and a following preposition (e.g. believe in, consist of, look after). Compare PHRASAL VERB.
pronoun 
A word that is used instead of a noun or noun phrase. Pronouns include personal pronouns (e.g. I, she, me), 
reﬂexive pronouns (e.g. myself, herself), possessive pronouns (e.g. mine, yours), and RELATIVE PRONOUNS 
(e.g. who, which).
quantiﬁer 
A word or phrase that goes before a noun or noun phrase to talk about the quantity of something (e.g. a 
little water, many of the women in the room).
question 
A wh-question begins with a WH-WORD (e.g. Where are you going?). A yes / no question is one that can be 
answered with ‘yes’ or ‘no’ (e.g. Do you like coffee?). An echo question repeats part of a previous utterance 
and asks for a repetition of all or part of it (e.g. ‘I’m moving to Alaska.’ ‘You’re moving where?’). We can 
ask an indirect question by putting it into a subordinate CLAUSE beginning with a WH-WORD or with if or 
whether (e.g. Can you tell me where you live?). 
relative clause 
A kind of subordinate CLAUSE that describes a noun that comes before it in a main CLAUSE. A deﬁning 
relative clause says which person or thing is being talked about (e.g. A friend who lives in London is getting 
married). A non-deﬁning relative clause gives more information about the noun (e.g. My bicycle, which 
I’ve left outside your house, is over 20 years old). A nominal relative clause begins with a WH-WORD or 
whatever, whenever, etc. and functions as a NOUN PHRASE in a sentence (e.g. What I need now is a long, hot 
bath). A reduced relative clause usually begins with an -ing (present participle) or -ed (past participle) 
form and has a similar meaning to a relative clause (e.g. I met the people living in our old house [= ... who 
live in our old house], The new rules only affect people born before 1960 [= ... who were born before 1960]).
relative pronoun 
A pronoun such as who, which, or that which is used at the beginning of a relative clause.
relative word
Words including RELATIVE PRONOUNS and others (e.g. whereby, why) that can begin a RELATIVE CLAUSE. 
reported speech
Speech that is reported without using the exact words of the speaker. Sometimes called ‘indirect speech’.
reporting clause & reported clause 
A statement that reports what people think or say is often divided into a reporting clause and a reported 
clause (e.g. She said [= reporting clause] that the building was unsafe [= reported clause]).
reporting verb 
A verb used in a REPORTING CLAUSE that describes what people say or think (e.g. ask, claim, say).
sentence connector 
A word or phrase that shows a connection between two separate sentences (e.g. My car isn’t very 
comfortable. However, it’s very cheap to run.; The house is large and has a beautiful garden. What’s more, 
it’s very close to the station.). Compare CONJUNCTION.
state verb  
A verb that is used to describe a state (e.g. believe, think) rather than an action. 
subject 
The person or thing that does the action of the verb (e.g. Luca went home). Compare OBJECT.
209
Glossary
subjunctive
The subjunctive is a set of verb forms used mainly in rather formal English to talk about possibilities 
rather than facts. The present subjunctive uses the base form of the verb (e.g. We suggest that she leave 
immediately) and the past subjunctive uses were (e.g. If I were you, I’d go home now). 
transitive verb 
A verb that takes an object (e.g. She was holding a bunch of ﬂowers). Compare INTRANSITIVE VERB.
two-word verbs & three-word verbs
Verbs that are commonly used with a particular PARTICLE (adverb or preposition) are referred to here as two-
word verbs (e.g. She looked after her elderly parents). Verbs that are commonly used with two particular 
particles (adverb + preposition) are referred to here as three-word verbs (e.g. He looked up to his older 
brothers). See also PREPOSITIONAL VERB and PHRASAL VERB.
verb 
A ﬁnite verb has a tense (e.g. She waited; She is waiting for you). Non-ﬁnite verb forms are INFINITIVE (e.g. 
He came to see me) and PARTICIPLE forms (e.g. Shouting loudly, I was able to make myself heard; Built in 
2011, the tower is still the tallest construction in Europe).
verb phrase 
A group of words consisting of one or more verbs (e.g. gives, is giving, has been giving).
wh-words 
A group of words (who, whom, whose, where, when, why, how) that are used in wh-QUESTIONS.
210
Study planner
Use this study planner if you need help in deciding which units you should study, or which part of the 
Grammar reminder you should read ﬁ rst. 
Which of the four multiple-choice options, A, B, C or D, completes the sentences in the correct or most likely 
way? Sometimes more than one option is possible. If you are not sure which options are correct, you may 
need to study any related sections of the Grammar reminder ﬁ rst and then the corresponding unit(s) listed on 
the right in the table below. You will ﬁ nd the full correct version of each sentence either in the section of the 
Grammar reminder or in the unit highlighted.
Tenses Grammar Unit
 reminder 
1.1 ‘Who  ?’ ‘  to get through to Misaki.’
A do you phone ... I’m trying        B are you phoning ... I’m trying
C are you phoning ... I try        D do you phone ... I try
A1 1, 2
1.2  to Turkey every year for your holidays?
A Are you going        B Were you going        C Have you gone 
D Do you go
A5 1, 2
1.3 I  you park outside the city and get the bus to the 
centre.
A am suggesting        B suggests        C suggest                
D was suggesting
1, 2
1.4 Sophia  me that you’re thinking of emigrating.
A told        B tells        C is telling        D tell
2, 1
1.5 Aisha  a few minutes ago.
A has left        B leaves        C left        D had left
A6 3, 4, 5
1.6 We  to the tennis club since we moved here.
A have belonged        B belong        C belonged        D are belonging
A11 3, 6
1.7 After she  hospital, she had a long holiday.
A leaves        B is leaving        C has left        D left
3, 4, 5
1.8 When he realised I  at him, he  away.
A looked … was turning        B was looking … turned        
C was looking … was turning        D looked … turned
A13 4, 7
1.9 When the builders were here I  them cups of tea all 
the time.
A was making        B am making        C made        D make
4, 7
1.10 When I went into the bathroom, I found that the bath.......................
.............. .
A overﬂ ows        B overﬂ owed        C had overﬂ owed        
D is overﬂ owing
A14 5, 7
1.11 I was sure that I  him before.
A had met        B am meeting        C meet        D met
5, 7
1.12 Your eyes are red –  ?
A did you cry        B have you been crying        C have you cried 
D do you cry
A17 6
211
1.13  this holiday for ages.
A We’re looking forward to        B We’ve been looking forward to 
C We look forward to        D We’ve looked forward to
6, 3
1.14 When I saw the vase on the website, I knew it was exactly what I 
 .
A looked for        B look for        C had been looking for 
D have looked for
A18 7
1.15   hard all year, so I felt that I deserved a holiday.
A I work        B I’d been working        C I’d worked        D I’m working
7, 4, 5
2.1 I  one of my special desserts for dinner, if you like.
A make        B ’m going to make        C ’ll make        D ’m making
B3 9
2.2 If Erik phones I  you know.
A ’m going to let        B let        C ’m letting        D ’ll let
9
2.3 ‘Has anybody offered to look after the children?’ ‘Sophia 
 it.’
A is to do        B ’s going to do        C does        D will do
B5 9
2.4 The next train to Dublin  at 3:45. (station 
announcement)
A will leave        B is leaving        C is going to leave        D leaves
B6 10
2.5 When you  Ben, tell him he still owes me some 
money.
A are going to see        B are seeing        C see        D will see
10
2.6 We  a party next Saturday. Can you come?
A ’re to have        B ’re having        C have        D ’ll have
B7 10
2.7 After the operation you  any sport for a while.
A won’t be doing        B aren’t doing        C don’t do        
D won’t to do
B8 11
2.8 When the race starts later this afternoon the drivers   
for drier weather than last year.
A were hoping        B are hoping        C hope        D will be hoping
11
2.9 In the next few years, thousands of speed cameras  
on major roads.
A are appear        B will appear        C are to appear        
D are appearing
12
2.10  to Bangkok by the end of June.
A I aim getting        B I’m aiming getting        C I aim to get
D I’m aiming to get
13
2.11 We  each other later that day, but I had to phone and 
cancel.
A see        B are seeing        C were seeing        D saw
14
Study planner
The future
 Grammar Unit
 reminder 
Study planner
212
Modals and semi-modals Grammar Unit
 reminder 
3.1 Despite yesterday’s snowfalls, we  home in less than
An hour.
A could drive        B can drive        C were able to drive
D are able to drive
C5 15
3.2 She swam strongly and  cross the river easily, even 
though it was swollen by the heavy rain.
A can        B was able to        C could        D is able to
15
3.3  me to get you some water?
A Would you like        B Should you like        C Shall you like 
D Will you like
C12 16
3.4 We  Switzerland four times during the 1990s.
A would visit        B used to visit        C visit        D visited
16
3.5 ‘While we’re in Moscow shall we go and see Dariya?’ ‘But it’s been 
nearly 20 years since we last saw her. She  remember 
us.’
A can’t        B couldn’t        C may not        D might not
C17 17
3.6 During the war, the police  arrest you for criticising 
the government.
A may        B might        C should        D could
17
3.7 ‘I’m seeing Dr Evans next week.’ ‘That  be right. He’s 
on holiday then.’
A mustn’t        B can’t        C hasn’t to        D hasn’t got to
C23 18
3.8 I can’t access the database. You  a password.
A must have got to put in        B must’ve to put in        
C must have to put in        D must put in
18
3.9 I  an interview because I’d worked there before.
A didn’t have to have        B needn’t have had        C didn’t need to 
have        D needn’t have
C27 19
3.10 Nowadays it  cost a fortune to own an e-book reader.
A hasn’t to        B needn’t        C doesn’t have to        D mustn’t
19
3.11 Walking under a ladder....................................be unlucky.
A is suppose to        B should        C ought to        D is supposed to
C32 20
3.12 It’s the third time she’s been skating this week. She  
really enjoy it.
A must        B should        C ought to        D had better
20
4.1 The trafﬁ  c lights  green and I pulled away.
A got        B became        C turned        D went
21
4.2 The building  the earthquake but then  
by a ﬁ re.
A was survived ... destroyed        B survived ... was destroyed
C survived ... destroyed        D was survived ... was destroyed
D1 22, 23, 
24
Linking verbs, passives, questions
Study planner
213
4.3 I’m really disappointed. I  for the team again.
A wasn’t picked        B didn’t pick        C didn’t get picked 
D wasn’t got picked
D2 22, 23, 
24
4.4 When I asked what was wrong,  .
A I was explained the problem        
B he explained the problem to me 
C the problem was explained to me        
D he explained me the problem
22
4.5 The children  to the zoo.
A were enjoyed taken        B enjoyed being taken        
C were enjoyed taking        D enjoyed taking
23
App.2
4.6 The new computer system  next month.
A is being installed by people        B is be installed        
C is being installed        D is been installed
24
App.2
4.7  that we have to leave.
A They have informed us        B It has been informed        
C It has been informed us        D We have been informed
25
4.8 He just turned away when I asked him.  he meant?
A Which do you think        B How do you think        
C What you think        D What do you think
E4, E1 26
4.9  to see in the town?
A What there are        B What is there        C What are there
D What there is
26
4.10  was in the box?
A What did you think that        B What you thought 
C What did you think        D What you did think
27
5.1 I always associate  .
A pizza        B pizza by Italy        C Italian pizza        D pizza with Italy
28
5.2 She described  .
A the situation        B the situation to me        C me the situation 
D the situation me
29
5.3 Stevens  the wallet.
A admitted to steal        B admitted steal        C admitted stealing 
D admitted him stealing
F5 30, 31
5.4 My parents wouldn’t  to the party.
A allow me go        B allow me to go        C allow me going 
D allow to go
F9 30, 31
5.5 She felt the mosquito  her.
A bites        B to bite        C bite        D biting
F13 30, 31
Verb complementation: what follows verbs
 Grammar Unit
 reminder 
Study planner
214
5.6 You don’t object  late tonight, do you?
A to working        B to work        C work        D working
30
5.7 They arranged  in London.
A for Rania to stay        B Rania to stay        C by Rania to stay 
D for Rania staying
31
6.1 Georgia  she would be late for the meeting. She 
 she was feeling ill.
A told that ... said that        B told that ... said me that
C told me that ... said that        D told me that ... said me that
G4/5 32
6.2 She  her holiday in Finland.
A told me about        B said about        C said me about 
D told about
G7 32
6.3 ‘I suppose you’ve heard the latest  to me.
A news,’ said she        B news.’ she said        C news’, she said 
D news,’ she said
32
6.4 I notiﬁ  ed  I had changed my address.
A with the bank that        B the bank that        C that 
D to the bank that
33
6.5 She reminded  .
A what to do        B me what I had to do        C what I had to do        
D me what to do
34
6.6 Police said that they  the missing girl.
A had found        B have found        C ﬁ nd        D were ﬁ nding
35
6.7 She encouraged  the job.
A to take the job        B that Fran should take        C Fran to take 
D to Fran to take
36
6.8 He asked where he  put the box.
A shall        B ought to        C will        D should
37
6.9 She asked my advice  subject she should study at 
university.
A on to what        B as to what        C on what        D to what
38
6.10 They directed that the building  .
A be pulled down        B to be pulled down
C should be pulled down        D should pull down
39
7 .1 The  faulty.
A equipments are        B equipment was        C equipments were 
D equipment were
H1
Reporting
Nouns
 Grammar Unit
 reminder 
Study planner
215
7 .2 The company  doing a lot of  in South 
America.
A is ... businesses        B are ... business        C are ... businesses 
D is ... business
H2 40
7 .3 The  shoes were covered in mud, so I asked them to 
take them off before they got into  car.
A girl’s ... Leon’s        B girls’... Leons’        C girls’... Leon’s 
D girl’s ... Leons’
H7 43
7 .4 The council  postponed a decision on the new road, 
and many leading members of the opposition party  
criticised the delay.
A has ... have        B has ... has        C have ... has        D have ... have
40
7. 5  thinks that Phil should be given the job.
A Neither of us        B The majority of my colleagues 
C Practically everyone        D A number of people
41
7 .6 Police  that Thomas is in Brazil, although his exact 
whereabouts ....................................unknown.
A believes ... are        B believe ... are        C believes ... is        
D believe ... is
42
7 .7 A new  is being built outside the town.
A golf course        B golfcourse        C golf’s course        D golf-course
H5
7 .8 The government has introduced  .
A a children’s clothes tax        B a tax on children clothes 
C a children clothes tax        D a tax on children’s clothes
43
7. 9  has improved enormously.
A David’s guitar playing        B David guitar playing
C Davids’ guitar playing        D The guitar playing of David
H11 40
8.1 I’ll be with you in  .
A one quarter of an hour        B a quarter of an hour 
C a quarter of one hour        D a quarter of hour
44
8.2 Look at  . It’s very bright tonight.
A the moons        B moon        C the moon        D a moon
I5 45–47
8.3 Sydney is  .
A a beautiful city        B beautiful city        C the beautiful city 
D the beautiful cities
I7 45–47
8.4  of the present continuous tense on page 32.
A There are example        B There are examples        
C There are the examples        D There is example
I9 45–47
Articles, determiners and quantiﬁ ers
 Grammar Unit
 reminder 
Study planner
216
8.5  is one of the many factors involved in changing 
farming methods.
A Climate        B A climate        C Climates        D The climate
45
8.6 Against her parents’ wishes, she wants to be  .
A the journalist        B journalist        C a journalist        D journalists
46
8.7 ‘You look upset.’ ‘Yes, I’ve had  .’
A the terrible morning        B terrible morning
C some terrible morning        D a terrible morning
47
8.8 I haven’t been here for  .
A some years        B any years        C years        D the years
I14 48
8.9 We haven’t got  left.
A a butter        B any butter        C the butter        D some butter
I15 48
8.10 ‘Where were you last week?’ ‘I was visiting  .’
A any friends        B friends        C the friends        D some friends
48
49–51
8.11  my jewellery is missing.
A Some of        B Any of        C Some        D Any
I23 49
8.12  the furniture  arrived yet.
A None ... has        B None ... have        C None of ... has 
D None of ... have
I34, I22–28 49
8.13 I phoned Sarah at home, but  .
A there were no answers        B there were no answer        
C there was no answers        D there was no answer
49
8.14 There isn’t  trafﬁ c along the street where I live.
A many        B much        C much of        D many of
I38, I22–28 50
8.15  the food was inedible.
A A large amount of        B Many of        C Much of 
D A large number of
50
8.16  waiting to hear the results.
A Everyone was        B All was        C Everyone were        D All were
I44 51
8.17 Following the ﬂ  ood,  in the area  major 
repair work.
A each of building ... need        B every building ... needs        
C every building ... need        D each buildings ... need
I46, I22–28 51
8.18  to Athens during the vacation.
A All they are going        B They are all going 
C They all are going        D They are going all
51
8.19 There is  evidence to support his claim.
A little of        B few        C a few        D little
I48, I22–28 52
8.20 We should use  time we have available to discuss 
Jon’s proposal.
A the little of        B the little        C the few        D little
52
 Grammar Unit
 reminder 
Study planner
217
Relative clauses and other types of clause Grammar Unit
 reminder 
9.1 My mother  enjoys hill walking.
A who is in her seventies        B , that is in her seventies,
C , which is in her seventies,        D , who is in her seventies,
J2 53
9.2 She’s one of the kindest people  .
A that I know        B I know        C who I know        D which I know
53
9.3 Do you know the date  we have to hand in the essay?
A which        B on which        C by which        D when
54
9.4 The valley  the town lies is heavily polluted.
A in that        B in which        C in        D which
55
9.5 The prisoners  are all women.
A who being released        B are being released        C being released 
D who are being released
56
9.6 She lives in the house  .
A which has the red door        B has the red door 
C with the red door        D which with the red door
57
9.7 ‘Wait a minute,’ said Amy,  .
A running through the door        B run through the door 
C ran through the door        D runs through the door
J8 58, 59
9.8  by the boys’ behaviour, she complained to the head 
teacher.
A She annoyed        B Annoyed        C She was annoyed 
D Annoying
J10 58, 59
9.9  at the party, we saw Ruth standing alone.
A Arrived        B We arrived        C Arriving        D We were arriving
58
9.10 Josh was the ﬁ  rst person I saw  hospital.
A by leaving        B on leaving        C in leaving        D on to leave
59
10.1 ‘What did you do to your hand?’ ‘I  when I was 
chopping vegetables.’
A cut me        B cut        C myself cut        D cut myself
K1 60
10.2 The scheme allows students from many countries to communicate 
 .
A each other        B with each other        C themselves 
D with one another
K7
10.3 We are conﬁ  dent that both sets of fans will  at the 
match.
A behave itself        B behave them        C behave themselves 
D behave
60
10.4 ‘We need new curtains.’ ‘Okay, let’s buy  .’
A ones with ﬂ owers on        B some        C ones        D one
61
Pronouns, substitution and leaving out words
Study planner
218
10.5 The two children  for breaking the window.
A each blamed other        B blamed other        C blamed each other
D each blamed the other
K9
10.6 I had a racing bike when I was young, and  .
A my brother did so        B so did my brother        C so my brother 
D did my brother
K10 62
10.7 ‘I don’t suppose there’ll be any seats left.’ ‘No, I  .’
A don’t suppose        B suppose        C don’t suppose so 
D suppose not
62
10.8 They needed someone who was both an excellent administrator
and manager.  was not easy to ﬁ nd.
A Such person        B A such person        C Such        D Such a person
63
10.9 ‘They could have been delayed by the snow.’ ‘Yes, they 
 .’
A could have        B could        C could been        D could have been
64
10.10 Leon was frightened – or maybe he just  .
A pretended to be        B pretended to        C pretended        
D pretend to be
65
11.1 He is a  .
A capable of making difﬁ cult decisions manager 
B manager capable of making difﬁ cult decisions 
C capable manager of making difﬁ cult decisions 
D manager capable to make difﬁ cult decisions
66
11.2 Our teacher gave us  problem to solve.
A a very impossible        B a completely impossible
C an absolutely impossible        D an extremely impossible
L2 67 , 68
11.3 Experience is  for the job.
A really essential        B fairly essential        C pretty essential 
D very essential
67
11.4 I met my  professor the other day. She is now
advising on the government’s  .
A old politics ... very foreign policy 
B very old politics ... foreign policy 
C very old politics ... very foreign policy 
D old politics ... foreign policy
68
11.5 I drank some  coffee.
A good very Brazilian        B Brazilian very good 
C very good Brazilian        D very Brazilian good
L3
11.6 I was  to ﬁ nd that the ﬁ lm was quite  .
A surprised ... frightening        B surprised ... frightened 
C surprising ... frightening        D surprising ... frightened
L4
Adjectives and adverbs
 Grammar Unit
 reminder 
Study planner
219
11.7 My watch was among the  .
A things taken        B taken things        C things stolen 
D stolen things
69
11.8 He was busy  his homework.
A to do        B doing        C that he was doing        D he was doing
70
11.9 It was  as we went into the room.
A strange quiet        B strange quietly        C strangely quiet 
D strangely quietly
L6 71
11.10 She  towards the door.
A quick ran        B ran quick        C ran quickly        D quickly ran
71
11.11 It was the  thing to say.
A most ridiculous        B ridiculous        C ridiculousest        
D most ridiculousest
L8 72
11.12 ‘Why did you buy these oranges?’ ‘They were  .’
A cheapest        B the cheapest        C the cheapest ones I could ﬁ nd 
D cheapest ones I could ﬁ nd
72
11.13 Despite his disability he tried to lead  as possible.
A as normal life        B a normal a life 
C as normal as life        D as normal a life
73
11.14 Have you heard the good news?  
A In May, Eva had a baby.        B Eva had a baby in May. 
C Eva in May had a baby.        D Eva had in May a baby.
74, 75
11.15  Kaspar nowadays, he’s so busy at the ofﬁ ce.
A We see hardly ever        B We hardly see ever 
C We hardly ever see        D Hardly we ever see
75
11.16 Only later  how much damage had been caused.
A she realised        B she did realised        C did she realise 
D realised she
76, 99, 
100
11.17 We  with the decision.
A agree very much        B much agree        C agree much 
D very much agree
77
11.18  , this summer is a crucial time for the government.
A Politics speaking        B Politically        C In political terms 
D In a political point of view
78
12.1 I  unwell when I  this morning.
A felt ... get up        B felt ... got up        C feel ... get up        
D feel ... got
M2
12.2 Have something to eat before you  .
A leave        B left        C will leave        D had left
M3
Adverbial clauses and conjunctions
 Grammar Unit
 reminder 
Study planner
220
12.3 I still feel tired  in the morning.
A when I wake up        B as I wake up        C when I will wake up 
D while I wake up
79
12.4 We were delayed  an accident.
A because        B because of there was        C because there was 
D because of
80
12.5 I wrote down her name  forget it.
A so as not to        B so not to        C not to        D in order not to
81
12.6 ....................................they slept soundly.
A Hot though was the night air        B Hot though the night air was 
C Hot as the night air was        D Hot although the night air was
82
12.7 I’ll give you a lift if it  .
A is raining        B will rain        C rained        D rains
M9 83, 84
12.8 If I had known how difﬁ  cult the job was, I  it.
A won’t have taken        B wouldn’t have taken        C won’t take it 
D mightn’t have taken
M14 83, 84
12.9 If I  a more reliable car, I  to Spain rather 
than ﬂ y.
A would have ... would drive        B had ... had driven
C had ... would drive        D would have had ... would drive
M17 83, 84
12.10 If the technology  available, we would be able to 
expand the business.
A would become        B were become        C were to become        
D became
83
12.11 If the North Sea  in winter, you could walk from 
London to Oslo.
A happened to freeze        B froze        C should freeze        
D should happen to freeze
84
12.12  in my seventies and rather unﬁ t, I might consider 
taking up squash.
A Were I not        B Was I not        C Weren’t I        D If I wasn’t
85
12.13 They couldn’t decide  it was worth re-sitting the 
exam.
A if        B whether or not        C whether        D if or not
86
12.14 It was midday.  , I put on the light.
A Even so        B Although        C Even        D Even though
87
13.1 He suddenly saw Eva  the room. He pushed his way 
 the crowd of people to get to her.
A across ... through         B over ... through        C across ... across        
D over ... along
88
Prepositions
 Grammar Unit
 reminder 
Study planner
221
13.2 The concert features,  others, Karl Frisk and the 
Johnsons. Their music is still very popular  teenagers.
A between ... among        B between ... between        
C among ... between        D among ... among
89
13.3  a pause in the conversation, she left the room.
A In        B During        C Over        D By
90
13.4  cricket, I enjoy watching football and basketball.
A Apart from        B Except        C Except for        D Besides
91
13.5 Jo  her disabled mother until her death last year. 
A cared after        B cared for        C took care of        D cared about
92
13.6 What’s the chance  ﬁ ve heads when you toss a coin 
ﬁ ve times?
A of getting        B to get        C of get        D get
93
13.7 She tried to  .
A talk me the plan out of        B talk out of me the plan 
C talk me out of the plan        D talk out me of the plan
94
14.1  people trying to get into the football stadium.
A There were too much         B There were too many 
C It was too many         D There was too many
95, 96
14.2  Sara wanted to borrow money.
A Suddenly hit me that         B It suddenly hit         
C It suddenly hit me that        D Suddenly hit me
96
14.3 I  you can swim so well and I can’t.
A hate        B hate it that        C hate that        D hate it
97
14.4 Luis lost his job and was short of money, so  his ﬂ at
and move in with his brother.
A that he did was to sell        B what he did was to sell 
C what he did sold        D what he did was sell
98
14.5  been diverted, they would have arrived early.
A Had the plane not        B Hadn’t the plane 
C The plane had not        D The plane not had
99
14.6  that Lana was able to retire at the age of 50.
A So successful her business was,        B So successful was her 
business,        C Her business was so successful        D So was her 
successful business
100
Organising information
 Grammar Unit
 reminder 
222
Grammar reminder
The Grammar reminder summarises basic information about some important areas of grammar. 
References within the main units point you to the sections of the Grammar reminder that are relevant 
to those units. Read these sections to refresh your understanding before you start work on the 
advanced grammar points in the unit. 
A
 Tenses 
Present continuous (➜ Units 1, 2 & 8)
A1  ‘Who are you phoning?’ ‘I’m trying to get through to Misaki.’
We use the present continuous to talk about particular events or activities that have begun 
but have not ended at the time of speaking. The event or activity is in progress at the 
present time, but not necessarily at the moment of speaking.
A2  She ’s doing voluntary work with young children until she starts her university course.
We use the present continuous to suggest that an event or activity is or may be temporary.
(For the present continuous for the future, see B7 & Unit 10.)
Present simple (➜ Units 1, 2 & 8)
A3  Trees grow more quickly in summer than in winter.
We use the present simple with verbs describing states or situations that are always true or 
continue indeﬁ nitely.
A4  This cake tastes wonderful. Where did you buy it?
We use the present simple with states or situations (thoughts, feelings) that exist at the 
present moment.
Verbs describing states include *agree, appreciate, attract, *desire, *doubt, expect, 
hate, hope, like, love, *prefer, *regret (to do with emotions, attitudes, and preferences); 
anticipate, assume, *believe, consider, expect, feel, ﬁ nd, imagine, *know, realise, 
think, understand (mental states); ache, hear, *notice, see, *smell, sound, *taste 
(senses and perception); *belong to, *consist of, *constitute, *contain, cost, *differ 
from, have, look, *mean, measure, *own, *possess, *resemble, *seem, weigh (to do 
with ‘being’, ‘having’, etc.).
The verbs marked * are rarely used with continuous tenses (but can be if we mean actions 
rather than states).
A5  Do you go to Turkey every year for your holidays?
We use the present simple to talk about habits or regular events or actions. (For the present 
simple for the future, see B6 & Unit 10.)
Past simple (➜ Units 3, 4, 5 & 8)
A6  Aisha left a few minutes ago.
A7  Mikhail continued the course even though it was proving very difﬁ cult.
We use the past simple to refer to a completed action or event in the past or to talk about 
situations that existed over a period of time in the past, but not now. We can either say 
when something happened, using a time adverbial (e.g. a few minutes ago: A6), or assume 
that the listener or reader already knows when it happened or can understand this from the 
context (A7).
A8  I saw my grandparents every week as a child.
We use the past simple to talk about repeated past actions.
(For the past simple in conditionals, see M12 & M13 and Unit 83.)
Present perfect (➜ Units 3, 6 & 8)
A9  We can’t have a meeting, because so few people have shown any interest.
A10  My ceiling has fallen in and the kitchen is ﬂ ooded. Come quickly!
A11  We have belonged to the tennis club since we moved here.
➜ Units 1–8
223
Grammar reminder
A12  Lee has represented his country on many occasions, and hopes to go on to compete in the 
next Olympics.
We use the present perfect to talk about a past action, event or state, when there is some 
kind of connection between what happened in the past, and the present time. Often we 
are interested in the way something that happened in the past affects or is relevant to the 
situation that exists now (A9). However, the connection with the present may also be that 
the action happened recently with a consequence for the present (A10), that it continues 
until the present time (A11), or that a repeated event in the past may (or may not) happen 
again (A12).
Past continuous (➜ Units 4, 7 & 8)
A13  When he realised I was looking at him, he turned away.
We use the past continuous to talk about a situation (… I was looking at him ...) that started 
before a particular point in the past (... he turned away) and was still in progress at that 
point.
Past perfect (➜ Units 5, 7 & 8)
A14  When I went into the bathroom, I found that the bath had overﬂ owed.
A15  By 10 o’clock most people had gone home.
We use the past perfect to talk about a past event that took place before another past 
event (A14), or before or up to a particular time in the past (A15).
(For the past perfect in conditionals, see M14 & Unit 83.)
Present perfect continuous (➜ Units 6 & 8)
A16  Since the operation two months ago, Samuel has been learning to walk again. He can 
already take one or two steps unaided.
A17  Your eyes are red – have you been crying?
We use the present perfect continuous to talk about an activity in progress in the past for a 
period until now, which is still in progress (A16) or has recently ﬁ nished (A17).
Past perfect continuous (➜ Units 7 & 8)
A18  When I saw the vase on the website, I knew it was exactly what I had been looking for.
We use the past perfect continuous to talk about a situation or activity that was in progress 
over a period up to a particular past point in time.
The future
Will + inﬁ nitive (➜ Unit 9)
B1  It’s late. I think I ’ll go to bed now.
B2  I think you ’ll enjoy the ﬁ lm.
We use will when we state a decision made at the moment of speaking (B1) and when we 
say that we think something is likely to happen in the future (B2).
B3  I ’ll make one of my special desserts for dinner, if you like.
B4  I’ve asked her to join us this evening, but she won’t.
We use will (or ’ll) when we talk about willingness to do something in the future (e.g. in 
offers (B3), invitations, requests, and orders) and will not (or won’t) when we talk about 
unwillingness to do something in the future (e.g. reluctance, refusal (B4)).
Be going to + inﬁ nitive (➜ Unit 9)
B5  ‘Has anybody offered to look after the children?’ ‘Sophia ’s going to do it.’
We use be going to when we state a decision made some time before we report it. Going 
to is often preferred in informal spoken English (where it is often pronounced /gənə/) and 
will is preferred in more formal contexts.
B
 ➜ Units 9–14
224
Grammar reminder
Present simple for the future (➜ Unit 10)
B6  The next train to Dublin leaves at 3.45. (station announcement)
We use the present simple to talk about future events that are part of some ofﬁ cial 
arrangement such as a timetable or programme. A time expression is usually used with the 
present simple for the future (... at 3.45) unless the time referred to is already clear from 
the context.
Present continuous for the future (➜ Unit 10)
B7  We ’re having a party next Saturday. Can you come?
We use the present continuous to talk about future activities and events that are intended 
or have already been arranged. Usually a personal pronoun is used (We ...) and a future time 
is mentioned (... next Saturday) or already understood.
Future continuous (➜ Unit 11)
B8  After the operation you won’t be doing any sport for a while.
We use the future continuous to talk about an activity or event happening at a particular 
time or over a particular period in the future. We usually mention the future time (After the 
operation …).
Modals and semi-modals
The modal verbs are: will, would, can, could, may, might, shall, should, must 
Modal verbs have meanings relating to ideas such as possibility, likelihood, prediction, necessity, 
permission and obligation. They do not have to-inﬁ nitive, -s, -ing or past participle forms. They are 
often followed by the bare inﬁ nitive of another verb (e.g. She might go) but can also be used on 
their own (e.g. Yes, I can). They cannot be followed directly by a to-inﬁ nitive, an -ing form, a past 
participle, or another modal verb. In questions they come before the subject (e.g. Could you help?) 
and before not in negatives (e.g. He won’t [= will not] help).
The semi-modals are: ought to, used to, need, dare, had better, have (got) to, be able to 
These have meanings like modal verbs but not the same formal features: for example, some can be 
marked for tense (e.g. have / had [got] to); some have non-modal uses (e.g. She needs a rest).
Can, could and be able to (➜ Unit 15)
C1  A polyglot is someone who can speak several different languages.
C2  Anita could speak three languages before she was six.
C3  Olivia couldn’t swim until she was ten.
When we say that someone or something has or doesn’t have the ability to do something, 
we use can(’t) (for the present; C1) or could(n’t) (for the past; C2, C3).
C4  ‘Why isn’t Ben here yet?’ ‘It could be because his mother’s ill again.’
We use could, not can, to say there is a possibility of something happening or being true.
C5  Despite yesterday’s snowfalls, we were able to drive home in less than an hour.
We can use be able to instead of can or could to talk about ability. We prefer be able to 
when we talk about a speciﬁ c achievement (particularly if it is difﬁ cult, requiring some 
effort; C5) rather than a general ability. Where there is a choice, in speech we generally 
prefer can or could rather than be able to.
C6  After the trees have been cut back, we will be able to see more of the garden from the 
sitting room.
We use will be able to, not can, to say that something is possible in the future on 
condition that something is done ﬁ rst.
C7  We can / are allowed to stay up late on Fridays and Saturdays because we don’t have to go 
to school the next day.
We use can for the present or the future and could for the past to report permission. We 
can also use be allowed to.
C
 ➜ Units 15–20
225
Grammar reminder
Will, would and used to (➜ Unit 16)
C8  Will / Won’t you have another biscuit? (‘Won’t you ...?’ is a very polite and rather formal 
offer)
C9  ‘Luka wants to borrow the car.’ ‘He will not.’ (a ﬁrm refusal)
C10  You will now put your pens down and pay attention. (a ﬁrm instruction)
We use will and will not (won’t) to talk about (un)willingness (see B3–4) and also to make 
offers (C8), requests, refusals (C9), and to give instructions (C10).
C11  You should apply for the job. You would have a good chance of getting it.
We can use would to make a prediction about an imaginary situation; that is, about 
something that may or may not happen (see also M13).
C12  Would you like me to get you some water?
We can use Would you like ... when we make an offer, but not ‘Will you like ...’. In requests, 
too, we can say I would like ..., but not ‘I will like ...’. We can use should (with I or we) 
instead of would in requests like this, but this is formal.
C13  We would / used to lend him money when he was unemployed.
C14  I used to live in a ﬂat in Paris.
To talk about things that happened repeatedly in the past, but don’t happen now, we can 
use would or used to + inﬁnitive (C13). Used to is more common in informal English. We 
can use used to but not would to talk about permanent past states (C14). Note how we 
normally make questions and negatives with use to in spoken English: ‘Did your children 
use to sleep well when they were babies?’; ‘I didn’t use to like visiting the dentist when I was 
young.’ Many people avoid using used to in questions and negatives without do (‘Used you 
to ...?’, ‘I usedn’t to ...’) and in question tags (..., usedn’t you?) because it sounds very formal 
and old-fashioned.
May, might, can and could (➜ Units 15 & 17)
C15  If the drought goes on much longer, there may / might / could be a hosepipe ban before the 
end of the month.
C16  Her parents may / might / could have inﬂuenced her decision to resign.
In afﬁrmative sentences (that is, sentences which are not questions or negatives) we use 
may, might, or could with a similar meaning to say that there is a possibility of something 
happening or being true (C15). Can is not used in this way. We sometimes prefer could 
to show that we are giving an opinion about which we are unsure. We use may / might / 
could + have + past participle to say that it is possible that something happened in the 
past (C16).
C17  ‘While we’re in Moscow shall we go and see Dariya?’ ‘But it’s been nearly 20 years since we 
last saw her. She may not / might not remember us.’
C18  I deﬁnitely saw her go out, so she can’t / couldn’t be at home.
In negative sentences, including sentences with words like only, hardly, or never, we use 
may not or might not to say it is possible that something is not true (C17), and can’t or 
couldn’t to say that it is not possible that something is true (C18).
C19  Coats may be left in the cloakroom.
May (not ‘might’) is used in formal contexts to say that something is allowed. May 
not is used to say that things are not allowed (e.g. Calculators may not be used in the 
examination.).
Must and have (got) to (➜ Unit 18)
C20  That’s really good news. I must tell Marco straight away.
C21  ‘Can we meet on Thursday morning?’ ‘Sorry, no. I have to go to the dentist at eleven.’ 
  When we say that it is necessary to do something, we use must or have (got) to. 
Sometimes it doesn’t matter which we use, although have got to is less formal than either 
must or have to and is particularly common in spoken English. However, we use must 
when we want to indicate that the speaker decides that something is necessary (C20) 
and we use have (got) to to suggest that someone else or some outside circumstances or 
authority makes something necessary (C21).
226
Grammar reminder
C22  She was bruised quite badly in the accident. It must hurt a lot.
We normally use must, not have (got) to, when we conclude that something (has) 
happened or that something is true .
C23  ‘I’m seeing Dr Evans next week.’ ‘That can’t be right. He’s on holiday then.’
When we give a negative conclusion we rarely use must not or have (got) to. Instead, we 
use can’t (cannot) or couldn’t.
C24  When my father went to school he had to learn Latin.
To say that something was necessary in the past we use had to, not must.
Need(n’t), don’t have to and mustn’t (➜ Units 18 & 19)
C25  He didn’t cook the meal himself so you needn’t / don’t have to eat it all. He won’t be 
offended.
C26  You mustn’t put anything on the shelves until the glue has set hard.
We use needn’t (or don’t need to) or don’t have to to say that something is not necessary 
(C25) and mustn’t to say that something is not allowed (C26).
C27  I didn’t need to / didn’t have to have an interview because I’d worked there before.
C28  I needn’t have cooked dinner. Just as it was ready, Pablo and Daniela phoned to say that 
they couldn’t come to eat.
When we say that it was not necessary to do something in the past, and it wasn’t done, 
we use didn’t need to or didn’t have to (C27). To show that we think something that was 
done was not in fact necessary we use need not (needn’t) have (C28).
Should, ought to and be supposed to (➜ Unit 20)
C29  You’ll catch cold if you go out like that. I think you should / ought to take a hat.
C30  I enjoyed her ﬁ  rst novel, so the new one should / ought to be good.
We can often use should or ought to with little difference in meaning when we talk about 
obligation (e.g. in giving advice, making recommendations, or talking about a responsibility, 
(C29) and the probability of something happening or being true (C30).
C31  The work was supposed to start / should have started / ought to have started last week.
C32  Walking under a ladder is supposed to be unlucky.
(Be) supposed to can be used instead of should / ought to to express a less strong 
obligation than should (C31). It is also used to report what many people think is true, but 
should / ought to are not used in this way (C32).
Passives 
Passive verb forms have one of the tenses of the verb to be and a past participle. Passive verb forms 
are summarised in Appendix 2. The choice between an active and passive sentence allows us to 
present the same information in two different orders. Compare:
active   The storm damaged the roof. passive  The roof was damaged.
   The roof was damaged by the 
storm.
This sentence is about the storm, and says what 
it did. The subject (The storm) is the ‘agent’ and 
the object (the roof ) is the ‘done to’.
These sentences are about the roof and say 
what happened to it (in the ﬁ rst sentence) and 
what did it (in the second). The subject (The 
roof ) is the ‘done to’. If it is mentioned, the 
agent (the storm) goes in a prepositional phrase 
with by after the verb.
D1  The building survived the earthquake but then was destroyed by a ﬁ re.
Verbs which take an object (transitive verbs) can have a passive form (... was destroyed). 
Verbs which do not take an object (intransitive verbs) do not have passive forms (The child 
vanished ..., but not ‘The child was vanished ...’).
D
 ➜ Units 22–25

227
Grammar reminder
However, many verbs can be used at different times with and without objects – that is, 
they can be both transitive and intransitive. Compare: ‘Are they meeting him at the 
airport?’ (transitive) and ‘Is he being met at the airport?’ (passive); ‘When shall we meet?’ 
(intransitive; no passive possible)
D2  I’m really disappointed. I didn’t get picked / wasn’t picked for the team again.
D3  The house was owned by an elderly couple before I bought it.
In spoken language we often use get + past participle (... didn’t get picked ...) instead of 
a passive form (... wasn’t picked ...) to talk about actions or events that we see as negative 
(D2). Note, however, that we can also use it to talk about positive actions and events 
(e.g. Great news – I got picked for the team again!). We don’t normally use get + past 
participle to describe states (D3).
Questions
E1 Basic question forms
If a verb phrase includes an auxiliary verb, 
the auxiliary verb comes before the subject.
 Are they leaving soon?
 Where will you stay?
If a verb phrase includes more than one 
auxiliary verb, only the ﬁ rst comes before 
the subject.
 Has she been doing her homework?
 What should we have told Nina?
In present and past simple tenses of verbs 
(apart from be), we use do or did.
 Does he enjoy school?
 Where did you go on holiday?
If be is used in a verb phrase without 
another verb, the form of be comes before 
the subject.
 Are you happy at work?
 Where was Lars today?
If we use what, which, who or whose as 
the subject, we use the same word order as 
in a statement; i.e. the subject goes before 
the verb phrase.
 What made that noise?
 Who can tell me the answer to 
question 5?
E2  What happened to your eye?
If we use what, which, who or whose as the subject, we don’t use do in the question (E2). 
However, note that we can sometimes use do when what, which, who or whose is the 
subject if we want to add emphasis, or to contrast with what has been said or implied.
Do is stressed in spoken English: ‘Come on, be honest – who did tell you?’ Don’t confuse 
whose with who’s (short for either who is or who has), which are pronounced the same.
E3  I’ve got orange juice or apple juice. Which would you prefer?
E4  He just turned away when I asked him. What do you think he meant?
In these questions the wh-word is the object. We prefer which when we are asking about 
an identiﬁ ed group or range of things or people (E3), and we use what when the possible 
range of reference is open (E4). Sometimes, however, we can use either which or what 
with little difference in meaning (e.g. What / Which towns do we go through on the way?).
E5  Haven’t you ﬁ nished your homework yet?
E6  Why didn’t she pay for the meal?
E7  Who wouldn’t like to own an expensive sports car?
We can use negative yes / no or wh-questions to make a suggestion, to persuade 
someone, to criticise, or to show that we are surprised, etc. We make a negative yes / no or 
wh-question with an auxiliary verb (have, did, would, etc.) + -n’t (E5, E6, E7). We can also 
ask a negative question using a negative statement and a positive ‘tag’ at the end (e.g. We 
don’t have to leave just yet, do we?). Negative questions can be used to sound polite when 
giving an opinion (e.g. Shouldn’t we offer her a lift?).
E
 ➜ Units 26–27
228
Grammar reminder
Verb complementation: what follows verbs 
F1  She described the attacker to the police.
F2  They arrived at the restaurant an hour late.
F3  He gave me a biscuit.
Some verbs (e.g. describe in F1) are followed 
by an object ... the attacker ...). These are called 
transitive verbs.
Also: arrest, avoid, do, enjoy, ﬁ nd, 
force, get, grab, hit, like, pull, report, 
shock, take, touch, want, warn
Some verbs (e.g. arrive in F2) are not usually 
followed by an object. These are called 
intransitive verbs. If a verb can’t be followed by 
an object, it can’t be made passive.
Some verbs (e.g. give in F3) are commonly 
followed by two objects (me and a biscuit in F3).
A good dictionary will list the meanings of verbs and tell you whether each meaning is 
intransitive, transitive and, if transitive, whether it is followed by one or by two objects.
F4–13 Many verbs can be followed by another verb in the form of a to-inﬁ nitive (e.g. refuse to 
eat), -ing (e.g. avoid working), bare inﬁ nitive (e.g. help carry). Note that when to comes 
after a verb it can be part of a to-inﬁ nitive (= to + the base form of a verb; e.g. He wants 
to go, She hopes to win) or it can be a preposition followed by a noun phrase (e.g. He went 
to the theatre) or by an -ing form (e.g. He admitted to having a gun). An -ing form often 
behaves like an object (e.g. I regret leaving).
Here is a summary of common patterns together with examples of verbs that are used in 
this pattern. Note that many verbs can be used in several different patterns, and that some 
of the verbs given can be used just with an object, and may also be used intransitively (e.g. 
He failed to stop, He failed the test, He failed).
Verb + to-inﬁ nitive F4  They won’t agree to pay for the damage. 
Also: aim, ask, decline, demand, fail, hesitate, hope, 
hurry, manage, offer, plan, prepare, refuse, want, 
wish
Verb + -ing F5  Stevens admitted stealing the wallet.
Also: avoid, consider, delay, deny, detest, dread, 
envisage, feel like, ﬁ nish, imagine, miss, recall, resent, 
risk, suggest
Verb + to-inﬁ nitive or -ing 
(little difference in meaning)
F6  Before we began eating / to eat my father 
thanked everyone for coming.
Also: cease, continue, start
Verb + to-inﬁ nitive or -ing 
(difference in meaning)
F7  She came hurrying up the path to bring us the 
news.
F8  How did you come to buy the car?
Also: go on, mean, regret, remember, stop, try
Verb + object + to-
inﬁ nitive
(= there must be an object)
F9  My parents wouldn’t allow me to go to the 
party.
Also: believe, cause, command, consider, enable, 
encourage, entitle, force, invite, order, persuade, 
show, teach, tell, warn
F
 ➜ Units 28–31
Also: appear, come, fall, go, happen, 
matter, sleep, swim, wait
Also: lend, offer, pay, sell, tell, throw

229
Grammar reminder
Verb + (object) + to-
inﬁ nitive
(= there may be an object)
F10  I would hate (her) to give the job up.
Also: help, like, love, need, prefer, want, wish
Verb + object + -ing
(= there must be an object)
F11  The police caught him driving without a 
licence.
Also: discover, feel, ﬁ nd, hear, leave, notice, observe, 
overhear, see, spot
Verb + (object) + -ing
(= there may be an object)
F12  I can’t stand (him) wearing a suit.
Also: detest, dislike, dread, envisage, hate, imagine, 
like, love, mind (in questions and negatives), miss, 
recall, regret, remember, resent, risk, start, stop
Verb + object + bare 
inﬁ nitive or -ing
(sometimes a difference
in meaning)
F13  She felt the mosquito bite / biting her.
Also: hear, notice, observe, overhear, see, watch
Reporting
When we report speech in a different context from the one in which it was originally produced, we 
sometimes need to make changes to the original words. Of course, differences between the original 
speech context and the one in which it is reported will inﬂ uence whether changes are needed and 
what they should be. Here are some possible changes:
G1  ‘Dan ’s arriving later today.’  She said that Dan was arriving later that day.
G2  ‘I was sure I’d left it here.’  He said that he was sure he’d left it there / on the table.
G3  ‘I grew these carrots myself.’  He told me that he had grown those carrots himself.
The tense we choose for a report is one that is appropriate at the time that we are reporting 
what was said or thought. This means that we sometimes use a different tense in the report 
from the one that was used in the original statement (G1 & G3) and change pronouns, 
references to time and place, and words such as this, that, and these (G1–G3).
G4  Georgia told me (that) she would be late for the meeting.
G5  She said (that) she was feeling ill.
G6  I said to Ivan (that) he had to work harder.
G7  She told me about her holiday in Finland.
Say and tell are the verbs most commonly used to report statements. We use an object 
after tell (... me ..., G4), but not after say (G5). Note, however, that we can use to + object 
after say (... to Ivan ..., G6), but not after tell, and that we can report what topic was talked 
about using tell + object + about (G7).
G8  ‘It’s a pity you can’t come this weekend.’
G9  “I’m really hungry. I fancy a cheese sandwich.”
When we quote what people think or what they have said, we put single (‘...’) (G8) or 
double (“...”) (G9) quotation marks at the beginning and end of a report of their exact 
spoken or written words. This is often referred to as direct speech
G10 Here are more examples of direct speech. Note the punctuation used:
  ‘I think we should go to India while we have the opportunity,’ argued Oliver.
  ‘Can I make an appointment to see the doctor?’ asked Maxim.
  ‘You must be mad!’ yelled her brother.
  ‘It tastes horrible,’ said Anna, ‘but it’s supposed to be very good for you.’
  ‘You should go home,’ Maria advised. ‘You’re looking really ill.’
  Daniel said, ‘Put them all on the top shelf.’
  She stood up and shouted to the children: ‘It’s time to go home!’
G11   ‘Why did she look at me like that?’ wondered Julia.
  Perhaps the door is open, thought Omar.
  Suddenly she thought: Could they be trying to trick me? 
G
 ➜ Units 32–39
230
Grammar reminder
To quote what a person thinks, we use the conventions shown in the examples above, or 
separate the quotation from the reporting clause with a comma (or colon) and leave out 
quotation marks.
Nouns
Countable and uncountable nouns
H1  The equipment was faulty.
Nouns can be either countable or uncountable. Countable nouns are those which can have 
the word a / an before them or be used in the plural. Uncountable nouns are not used with a 
/ an or in the plural. Some nouns in English are normally uncountable (like equipment in H1), 
while in many other languages they are countable, e.g. accommodation, advice. 
Also:  applause, assistance, baggage, camping, cash, chaos, chess, clothing, conduct, 
courage, cutlery, dancing, dirt, employment,  evidence, fun, furniture, harm, 
health, homework, housing, housework, information, jewellery, leisure, litter, luck, 
luggage, machinery, money, mud, music, news, nonsense, parking, pay, permission, 
photography, poetry, pollution, produce, progress, publicity, research, rubbish, 
safety, scenery, shopping, sightseeing, sunshine, transport, underwear, violence, 
weather, work
H2  The company is / are doing a lot of business in South America.
Sometimes a noun is used uncountably when we are talking about the whole substance or 
idea (e.g. business), but countably when we are talking about units or different kinds (e.g. 
businesses). 
Compare: 
 Three coffees and a lemonade, please. – Brazil 
is a major producer of coffee.
 Most toothpastes contain colourings. – Don’t 
forget to buy some toothpaste.
 The chickens have escaped. – I don’t eat 
chicken.
 I have a fear of spiders. – He was trembling 
with fear.
H3  The use of recycled paper is saving thousands of trees from being cut down each year.
Some nouns (e.g. paper) usually have different meanings when they are used countably and 
uncountably.
Compare: 
 I just don’t understand grammar. – I looked the 
answer up in a grammar (= a reference book)
 I got held up in a jam (= trafﬁ c jam). – This jam 
is really sweet. (Note that ‘jams’ can also be 
used to mean types of jam)
 She made a wonderful speech at the wedding. 
– His speech has been affected by the illness.
Compound nouns (➜ Unit 43)
H4  How much pocket money do you give to your children?
H5  A new golf course / golf-course is being built outside the town.
A compound noun (e.g. pocket money) is an expression made up of more than one 
word, which functions as a noun in a sentence. For example, we can use a noun + noun 
combination to say what something is made of, where something is, when something 
happens, or what someone does.
Examples: rice pudding, a glasshouse, the kitchen cupboard, hill fog, a night ﬂ ight, 
a morning call, a language teacher, a window-cleaner 
H
 ➜ Units 40–43
Also: beer, coffee, water; 
fruit, toothpaste, washing 
powder; cake, chicken, land, 
paint, space, stone; abuse, 
(dis)agreement, difﬁ culty, 
fear, improvement, 
language, life, pain, protest, 
responsibility, success, 
thought, war
Also: competition, glass, 
grammar, iron, jam, lace, 
property, room, sight, 
speech, time, tin, work
231
Grammar reminder
We sometimes make compounds from nouns, which consist of more than two nouns. 
Examples: a milk chocolate bar, an air-trafﬁc controller, a dinner-party conversation
Some compound nouns are usually written as one word (e.g. a tablecloth), some as 
separate words (e.g. waste paper), and others with a hyphen (e.g. a house-sitter). Some 
compound nouns can be written in more than one of these ways (e.g. a golf course or 
a golf-course; H5). A good dictionary will tell you how a particular compound noun is 
usually written.
H6  She got some chewing gum stuck on her shoe.
-ing + noun compound nouns
(the -ing form usually says what 
purpose the following noun has)
Examples: chewing gum, a living room, 
drinking water, (a pack of) playing cards, a 
dressing gown, a turning-point, a working 
party
noun + -ing compound nouns
(usually refer to actions or processes)
Examples: ﬂy-ﬁshing, ﬁlm-making, 
sunbathing, risk-taking, life-saving
The possessive form of nouns
H7  The girls’ shoes were covered in mud, so I asked them to take them off before they got into 
Leon’s car.
To make the possessive form of nouns in writing – referring to people or groups of people 
(e.g. companies), other living things, places, times, etc. – we add ’s (‘apostrophe s’) to singular 
nouns and to irregular plurals that don’t end in -s (e.g. Leon’s car; the college’s administrators; 
women’s issues) and add ’ (an apostrophe) to regular plurals (e.g. the girls’ shoes; the 
companies’ difﬁculties). To make the possessive form of names ending in -s pronounced /z/ 
we can add either ’ or ’s (e.g. It’s Leon Jones’ [or Leon Jones’s] new sports car).
H8  That old car of Zara’s is falling apart.
H9  It belongs to a friend of his.
We can use the pattern noun + of + ’s (H8) or a possessive pronoun (H9) to talk about 
something that someone owns, or about a relationship. Note that when we are talking 
about relationships between people we can also use a noun without ’s (e.g. an uncle of 
Emil’s (or an uncle of Emil)).
H10  We’re going to Mona’s (house) for the evening.
The noun following a possessive form can be left out when we talk about someone’s house. 
We don’t use ‘shop’ when we talk about, for example, the newsagent’s / the chemist’s 
or the newsagent / the chemist (but not ‘the newsagent’s shop’ / ‘the chemist’s shop’) 
where the name of the shop includes the profession of the person who works there 
(compare ‘the sweet shop’, but not ‘the sweet’s shop’).
H11  David’s guitar playing has improved enormously.
H12  The construction of the ofﬁce block was opposed by protestors.
Often we can use the possessive ’s or ... of + noun ... with very little difference in meaning. 
However, in general, we are more likely to use the possessive form of a noun when the 
noun refers to a particular person or group of people (H11); and when we are talking about 
time (e.g. next year’s holiday prices, rather than the holiday prices of next year).
We are more likely to use the ... of + noun ... form with an inanimate noun (H12); when 
we are talking about a process, or a change over time (e.g. the establishment of the 
committee, rather than the committee’s establishment); and when the noun is a long noun 
phrase (e.g. She is the sister of someone I used to go to school with. rather than She is 
someone I used to go to school with’s sister.).
232
Grammar reminder
Articles, determiners and quantiﬁ ers
Determiners are words such as this, her, and your which determine or specify what a noun or noun 
phrase refers to. They come before the noun and at the front of the noun phrase. Quantiﬁ ers are words 
such as some, much, and few which identify the quantity of something. Some words can be both 
determiners and quantiﬁ ers (e.g. ‘I sent out invitations to a few friends’ [few = determiner] and 
‘A few of my friends came to the party’ [few = quantiﬁ er]) while some are determiners only (e.g. ‘This 
is my friend Andrew’ [my = determiner]). Many determiners and quantiﬁ ers can be pronouns, taking 
the place of a noun phrase (e.g. I’ve invited all my friends and most are coming [most = pronoun]). 
Articles (a / an and the) are determiners. They also specify what the noun refers to and come at the 
beginning of the noun phrase. However, they cannot be quantiﬁ ers or pronouns.
The (➜ Units 45–47)
I1  Lisa took a cake and some biscuits to the party, but only the biscuits were eaten.
I2  Can you shut the door after you, please?
I3  We had a good time on holiday. The beaches were all beautifully clean.
I4  Give it to the man wearing the red coat.
I5  Look at the moon. It’s very bright tonight.
We use the with singular, plural or uncountable nouns when we expect the listener or 
reader to be able to identify the thing or person we are referring to in the following noun. 
It may be that the thing has already been mentioned (I1); that it is clear from the situation 
which person or thing we mean (I2); that it is in some other way understandable from the 
context which thing or person we mean (I3; ‘the beaches’ = ‘the beaches we went to’); that 
the thing or person is identiﬁ ed in what is said after the noun (I4; ‘wearing the red coat’); 
or that there is only one of a particular thing (I5 and also, for example, the Great Wall of 
China, the North Pole, the USA, the world).
A / an (➜ Units 44–47)
I6  Helen’s just bought a house on Wilson Street.
I7  Sydney is a beautiful city.
We use a / an with singular nouns when we don’t expect the listener or reader to be able to 
identify the thing or person we are referring to in the following noun. We often use a / an 
to introduce a new speciﬁ c person or thing (I6); or when the noun refers to a class of people 
or things generally – for example, when we describe someone or something or say what 
type of thing someone or something is (I7).
Zero article (➜ Units 45–47)
I8  [–] Water has got into my camera and damaged it.
I9  There are [–] examples of the present continuous tense on page 32.
We use zero article [–] with uncountable and plural nouns when we talk generally about 
people or things rather than about speciﬁ c people or things. We might talk about a whole 
class of things in a general way (I8) or about an indeﬁ nite number or amount (I9).
Some (➜ Unit 48)
Some and any are used with plural and uncountable nouns, usually when we are talking about 
limited, but indeﬁ nite or unknown, numbers or quantities of things.
I10  Peter gave me some advice.
I11  Hasn’t some information about the proposal been sent out already? I thought I read about 
it last week.
I12  Shall I send you some details?
We generally use some: in afﬁ rmative sentences (sentences which are not negatives or 
questions) (I10); in questions where we expect agreement or the answer ‘Yes’ (I11); in offers 
and requests in order to sound positive, expecting the answer ‘Yes’ (I12). If it is used in this 
way some is pronounced with its weak form /səm/.
I
 ➜ Units 44–52
233
Grammar reminder
I13  Some teachers never seem to get bored with being in the classroom.
We use some to talk about particular, but unspeciﬁed, people or things with the 
implication ‘some, but not all’. If it is used in this way some is pronounced with its strong 
form /sʌm/.
I14  I haven’t been here for some years.
We use some (pronounced /sʌm/) when we mean quite a large amount of, or a large 
number of something. Note that we can say ‘some years, months, weeks, etc.’ or just ‘years, 
months, weeks, etc.’ with a similar meaning.
Any (➜ Unit 48)
I15  We haven’t got any butter left.
I16  Do you have any better ideas?
I17  Any student could have answered the question.
We generally use any: in sentences with a negative meaning (I15); in questions where we 
don’t necessarily expect agreement or the answer ‘Yes’ (I16); when we mean ‘all (of them), 
and it’s not important which’ (I17).
I18  If you see any cherries in the shop, can you buy them?
I19  Any questions should be sent to the manager.
We commonly use any: in ‘if’ clauses (I18; note that ‘some’ is possible, but would seem 
to expect that you will see cherries); when any means ‘if there is / are’ (I19; = If there are 
questions ...).
Anyone, someone, etc.
I20  Isabella lives somewhere in Denmark.
I21  I’ve never seen anybody that tall before.
The rules for the use of the following words are generally the same as those given in I10–I19 
for some and any: the pronouns someone / anyone, somebody / anybody, something 
/ anything, (note that somebody = someone, and anybody = anyone), and the adverbs 
somewhere / anywhere. For example, some- words are generally used in afﬁrmative 
sentences (I20), and any- words are generally used in sentences with a negative meaning 
(I21).
Quantiﬁers with and without ‘of’: any (of), some (of), much (of), many (of), both (of), 
all (of) each (of), none (of), few (of), little (of) (➜ Units 48–52)
I22  Many of Liam’s closest friends are women.
I23  Some of my jewellery is missing.
I24  Have you seen any of these new light bulbs in the shops yet?
I25  Are you going to eat all (of) that cake, or can I ﬁnish it?
I26  Both of us were exhausted after ﬂying to Japan.
I27  I polished each trophy with a soft cloth.
I28  Is there much orange juice left?
We usually need to put of after quantiﬁers when there is a possessive form (I22), pronoun 
(I23) or determiner (I24) before a noun. Note, however, that in informal contexts after 
both and all we can leave out of before the, these, those (and this or that with all; I25); 
my, your, her, his, etc.; and mine, yours, etc., but not before them, you, or us (I26) (or it 
with all). We don’t use of after a quantiﬁer immediately before a noun (I27 & 28).
No, none (of), neither (of), either (➜ Unit 49)
I29  There’s no train until tomorrow.
I30  No information was given about how the study was conducted.
I31  She had no shoes on.
I32  None of my clothes ﬁt any more. 
234
Grammar reminder
I33  ‘How many children have you got?’ ‘ None.’
We use the determiner no to mean ‘not a’ or ‘not any’ before a singular (I29), uncountable 
(I30), or plural noun (I31). Before the, my, this, etc. we use the quantiﬁ er none (of) to 
mean ‘not any’ (I32). If it is clear from the context what we mean, we can use the pronoun 
none (I33).
I34  None of the furniture has arrived yet.
When we use none of with an uncountable noun the verb must be singular. However, when 
we use none of with a plural noun the verb can be either singular or plural (e.g. None of 
the parcels have / has arrived yet), although the singular form is more grammatical.
I35  Neither of his parents could drive.
We use neither of instead of none of when we are talking about two people or things.
I36  You could catch the 10:05 or the 10:32. Either train gets you there in good time.
I37  Has either of them passed their driving test yet?
When we use either as a determiner (I36), it is followed by a singular countable noun. If 
this is the subject of the sentence, it is followed by a singular verb. We use either of with 
plural nouns and pronouns (I37). Note that either can also be used as an adverbial as in 
‘We can either take the train or go by bus’ and ‘I had no wish to go, and Lev didn’t want to 
go either’.
Much (of), many (of), a lot of, lots (of) (➜ Unit 50)
I38  There isn’t much trafﬁ c along the street where I live.
I39  Will you be taking many suitcases on the trip?
Much and many are used to talk about quantities and amounts. Much is used with 
uncountable nouns (I38) and many with plural nouns (I39). Before the, my, this, etc. we 
use much of / many of. Much of can also be used with a singular countable noun to mean 
‘a large part of’ (e.g. Much of the national park was destroyed in the ﬁ re.). We can use much 
and many without a noun if the meaning is clear (e.g. Can you get some sugar when you 
go shopping? There isn’t much left.). Much and many are often used after as, how, so, and 
too (e.g. I’d say there were twice as many women at the meeting as men.).
I40  She didn’t show much interest in what I said.
I41  Mariam offered me a lot of money for the car.
I42  Many of my relatives live around Auckland.
Much (of) and many (of) are used in negative sentences to emphasise that we are talking 
about small (or smaller than expected) quantities or amounts (I40) and in questions to ask 
about quantities or amounts (e.g. Have you got much homework to do?). In afﬁ rmative 
sentences we often use a lot of, lots of or plenty of rather than much (of) and many to 
talk about large amounts and quantities, particularly in conversation and informal writing 
(I41). However, many of is common in afﬁ rmative sentences in both formal and informal 
contexts (I42).
All (of) (➜ Unit 51)
I43  There is heating in all (of) the holiday cottages.
We use all or all of when we are talking about the total number of things or people in a 
group, or the total amount of something. In informal contexts we can leave out of.
I44  Everyone was waiting to hear the results.
In modern English we don’t use all without a noun to mean ‘everyone’ or ‘everything’. 
However, all can mean ‘everything’ when it is followed by a relative clause (e.g. I don’t 
agree with all that he said. (= everything that he said)). We can also use all without a noun 
to mean ‘the only thing’ (e.g. All she wants to do is help.).
Each / every (➜ Unit 51)
I45  Every newspaper had the same front page story.
I46  Following the ﬂ  ood, every building in the area needs major repair work.
We can use each and every with singular countable nouns (I45), and each of with plural 
nouns, to mean all things or people in a group of two or more (each (of)) or three or more 

235
Grammar reminder
(every). We use a singular verb (... needs ...) after each (of) and every (I46). However, when 
each follows the noun or pronoun it refers to, the noun / pronoun and verb are plural (e.g. 
Every student is tested twice a year. They are each given a hundred questions to do.).
(A) few (of), less (of), (a) little (of) (➜ Unit 52)
I47  A few of the boys were very good computer gamers.
I48  There is little evidence to support his claim.
We use (a) few (of) with plural countable nouns (I47) and (a) little (of) with uncountable 
nouns (I48).
I49  There’s a lot less water in the lake than last year.
I50  The holiday cost less than I thought it would.
We use less (of) with uncountable nouns (I49) or in a general sense (I50).
I51  I’ve got a few close friends that I meet regularly.
I52  He has few close friends and often feels lonely.
We often use a few and a little in a ‘positive’ way (I51); for example, to suggest that a 
small amount or quantity is enough, or to suggest that it is more than we would expect. We 
often use few and little in a ‘negative’ way (I52); for example, to suggest that the amount 
or quantity is not enough, or is surprisingly low. Compare ‘A few of her songs were popular 
and she was very well known’ (= ‘positive’) and ‘Few of her songs were very popular and 
eventually she gave up her musical career’ (= ‘negative’). This use of few and little is often 
rather formal.
Relative clauses and other types of clause
Relative clauses have a similar function to adjectives in that they give more information about 
someone or something referred to in a main clause. Participle clauses (-ing and -ed clauses) can be 
used like relative clauses, but can also have an adverbial function, giving information about time, 
cause, etc.
Relative clauses (➜ Units 53–55)
J1  Magnus stopped the police car that was driving past.
J2  My mother, who is in her seventies, enjoys hill walking.
Deﬁ ning relative clauses (e.g. ... that was driving past; J1) are used to specify which person 
or thing we mean, or which type of person or thing we mean. Note that we don’t put a 
comma between the noun and a deﬁ ning relative clause.
Non-deﬁ ning relative clauses (e.g. ..., who is in her seventies, ...; J2) are used to add extra 
information about a noun, but this information is not necessary to explain which person 
or thing we mean. We don’t use them often in everyday speech, but we do use them 
frequently in written English. Note that we often put a comma before and after a non-
deﬁ ning relative clause.
J3  The house, which is to the north of the road, is owned by a rock star.
After a relative clause, we don’t repeat the subject with a pronoun; so, for example, we 
wouldn’t say ‘The house which is to the north of the road it is owned by a rock star’. 
However, this is sometimes found in informal speech; for example, ‘A friend of mine who is 
a solicitor – she helped me.’
J4  I have a friend who / that plays guitar. (a friend = subject, plays = verb, guitar  = object)
J5  He showed  me the rocks (which / that) he had collected. (the rocks = object, he = subject, 
had collected = verb)
When we use a deﬁ ning relative clause, the relative pronoun can be either the subject or the 
object of the relative clause. When it is the subject the word order is subject + verb + object 
(J4). When the relative pronoun is the object the word order is object + subject + verb (J5).
-ing clauses (= present participle clauses) (➜ Units 58 & 59)
J6  Glancing over his shoulder, he could see the dog chasing him.
J7  Pushing her way through the crowds, she just managed to get on the bus as it pulled away.
J
 ➜ Units 53–59
236
Grammar reminder
J8  ‘Wait a minute,’ said Amy, running through the door.
We can use an -ing clause to talk about something that takes place at the same time as 
(J6) or just before (J7) an action in the main clause. We often use an -ing clause in written 
narrative after quoted speech, when we want to say what someone was doing while they 
were talking (J8).
Note that the understood subject of -ing and -ed (see J10) clauses should be the same as 
the subject of the main clause. For example, in J6, ‘he’ is the unstated subject of ‘Glancing 
over his shoulder ...’.
J9  Knowing exactly what I wanted, I didn’t spend much time shopping.
-ing clauses can be used to talk about reasons and results. This sentence has a similar 
meaning to ‘Because I knew exactly what I wanted, I didn’t spend much time shopping’.
-ed clauses (= past participle clauses) (➜ Units 58 & 59)
J10  Annoyed by the boys’ behaviour, she complained to the headteacher.
We can use an -ed clause to talk about something that happened before an action in the 
main clause. Often the event in the -ed clause causes the event in the main clause.
Pronouns, substitution and leaving out words
Reﬂ exive pronouns (➜ Unit 60)
K1  ‘What did you do to your hand?’ ‘I cut myself when I was chopping vegetables.’ 
  When the subject and object of a sentence refer to the same person or thing, we use a 
reﬂ exive pronoun as the object of a sentence rather than a personal pronoun. The singular 
forms of reﬂ exive pronouns are myself, yourself, herself, himself, itself; the plural forms 
are ourselves, yourselves, themselves.
K2  We phoned the plumber and he came himself.
K3  My sister drew the picture herself.
K4  I was given this book by the author herself.
We can use reﬂ exive pronouns for emphasis: for example, after an intransitive verb (K2) 
to emphasise the subject; after a transitive verb (K3) to emphasise that something is done 
without help; or after a noun to emphasise that noun (K4).
Each other / one another
K5  They tried to avoid each other / one another at the party.
K6  John and Carmen ﬁ  rst met (each other / one another) when they were working in Spain.
Some verbs, such as avoid (K5), can be used to describe actions in which two or more 
people or things do the same thing to the other(s). We use each other or one another with 
these. 
Also: attract, complement, face, help, repel
After other verbs such as meet (K6), we can use each other or one another, but this may 
be omitted when the subject is plural or has the form ‘... and ...’ .
Also: embrace, ﬁ ght, kiss, marry
K7  The scheme allows students from many countries to communicate with each other / with 
one another.
K8  We looked at each other / one another and started to laugh.
With some verbs (e.g. communicate) we have to use a preposition, often with, before each 
other / one another (K7 & K8). 
Also: agree, coincide, collaborate, compete (against), contrast, co-operate, 
disagree, joke, look at, quarrel, talk to / with 
K9  The two children each blamed the other for breaking the window.
For emphasis we can separate each and other. This sentence is more emphatic than ‘The 
two children blamed each other ...’.
K
 ➜ Units 60–65

237
Grammar reminder
Substitution (➜ Units 61–63)
K10  I had a racing bike when I was young, and so did my brother.
K11  ‘Emma loves ice cream.’ ‘ So do I.’
K12  ‘I didn’t think much of the restaurant.’ ‘ Neither did I.’
We can use so + auxiliary verb + subject to say that a second person does the same things 
as the person already mentioned (K10 & K11). The corresponding negative form uses neither 
(K12), nor (‘Nor did I’), or not ... either (‘I didn’t either’). We often use this to avoid repetition 
(e.g. in K12 we use ‘Neither did I’ rather than ‘I didn’t think much of the restaurant either’).
Adjectives and adverbs
 Gradable and non-gradable adjectives (➜ Units 67–68)
L1  They live in a very large house.
L2  Our teacher gave us an absolutely impossible problem to solve.
Most adjectives describe qualities that can be measured or graded, and so can be used 
in comparative and superlative forms and with words such as ‘very’ or ‘extremely’. These 
are referred to as gradable adjectives (for example, ‘large’ in L1). Some adjectives are not 
gradable because they refer to qualities that are completely present or completely absent. 
These non-gradable adjectives (e.g. ‘impossible’ in L2) are not usually used in comparative 
and superlative forms or with words such as ‘very’ or ‘extremely’. They can often, however, 
be used with words such as ‘absolutely’ or ‘completely’.
Order of adjectives
L3  I drank some very good Brazilian coffee.
When we use more than one adjective before a noun, there is often a preferred (although 
not ﬁ xed) order for these adjectives depending on what type of adjective they are: 
opinion + size / physical quality / shape / age + colour + participle adjectives + 
origin + material + type + purpose + NOUN
Examples:
an old plastic container
a hard red ball 
a frightening Korean mask 
a round biscuit tin 
a small broken plate 
a useful digital alarm clock 
= age + material + noun
= quality + colour + noun
= opinion + origin + noun
= shape + purpose (for holding biscuits) + noun
= size + participle adjective + noun
= opinion + type + purpose + noun
To help you to learn this order, it can be useful to remember that gradable adjectives 
(describing opinion, size, quality, shape, and age) usually precede ungradable adjectives 
(participle adjective and adjectives describing origin, material, type and purpose).
Easily confused adjectives
L4  I was surprised to ﬁ nd that the ﬁ lm was quite frightening.
Some adjectives that are used to describe feelings about something or someone else have 
both an -ed and -ing form. Generally, the -ed form describes how the person feels (e.g. I 
was surprised ...), and the -ing form gives an evaluation of the thing or other person (e.g. ... 
the ﬁ lm was quite frightening.)
Also: alarmed – alarming, amazed – amazing, bored – boring, excited – exciting, 
interested – interesting, pleased – pleasing, tired – tiring, worried – worrying
Adjectives and adverbs: use (➜ Unit 71)
L5  The staff in the shop always speak politely to customers.
L6  It was strangely quiet as we went into the room.
We use an adverb, not an adjective, to say how something happened or was done (L5), or to 
modify adjectives (L6).
L
 ➜ Units 66–78
238
Grammar reminder
Adjectives and adverbs: comparative and superlative forms (➜ Unit 72)
L7  The building was bigger than I’d expected.
L8  It was the most ridiculous thing to say.
We usually add the ending -er to one-syllable adjectives and adverbs to make their 
comparative forms (L7) and -est to make their superlative forms. With three or more 
syllables we usually add more / less and most / least (L8). With two syllables we can 
usually use either.
Quite
L9  I was quite satisﬁ ed with the result.
L10  No, you’re quite wrong!
L11  The food here is quite superb.
Quite has two meanings: to a particular degree, but not ‘very’ (= ‘fairly’) (L9); and to a 
large degree, or ‘very much’ (= ‘completely’) (L10). When quite is used with non-gradable 
adjectives it means ‘completely’ (L11).
Adverbial clauses and conjunctions
An adverbial clause is a type of subordinate clause, linked to a main clause. An adverbial clause adds 
extra information to the main clause about such things as time and conditions. Most adverbial clauses 
begin with a conjunction that indicates their link with the main clause. Example conjunctions are 
after, before, when and until (time conjunctions); and if and unless (conditional conjunctions).
Tenses in adverbial and main clauses: general
M1  Because I’ m overweight, my doctor has put me on a diet.
M2  I felt unwell when I got up this morning.
The verb in the adverbial clause is usually the same tense as the verb in the main clause. In 
M1 they are both present (present simple + present perfect), and in M2 they are both past 
(past simple + past simple).
Time clauses: tenses (➜ Unit 79)
M3  Have something to eat before you leave.
To refer to the future after a time conjunction (... before ...) we use present tenses.
M4  As soon as you see / have seen her, come and tell me.
M5  She wrote to me after she spoke / had spoken to Carlos.
To talk about an action in the adverbial clause that is completed before another action 
described in the main clause, we can use either simple or perfect tenses (present as in M4 
or past as in M5), but not will or will have + -ed (the future perfect).
M6  When I saw Kim, I asked her over for dinner.
If the actions in the main clause and the adverbial clause take place at the same time, we 
use simple, not perfect tenses.
M7  While the children were swimming, their mother kept a watchful eye on them.
M8  I read a book while I waited.
While is mainly used with continuous tenses (M7) and also with simple tenses (M8).
Conditional clauses (➜ Units 83–86)
Real and unreal conditionals (➜ Units 83 & 84)
Some conditional clauses beginning with if suggest that a situation is real – that is, the situation is or 
was true, or may have been or may become true (e.g. If anyone phones, tell them I’ll be back at eleven; 
If you really want to learn Italian, you need to spend some time in Italy). Others suggest that a situation 
is unreal – that is, the situation is imaginary or untrue. (e.g. What would you do if you won the lottery?; 
If you had started out earlier, you wouldn’t have been so late).
Compare: If I go to Berlin, I’ll travel by train. (= real conditional) and If I went to Berlin, I’d travel by 
train. (= unreal conditional). In the ﬁ rst, the speaker is thinking of going to Berlin (it is a real future 
possibility), but in the second, the speaker is not thinking of doing so. The second might be giving 
someone advice.
M
 ➜ Units 79–87
239
Grammar reminder
Real conditionals: tenses (➜ Units 83 & 84)
M9  I’ll give you a lift if it rains.
M10  If you leave now, you’ll be home in two hours.
M11  If water freezes, it expands.
M12  If I made the wrong decision then I apologise.
In real conditionals we use a present tense to talk about the future (M9), the present (M10) 
or unchanging relationships (M11), and past tenses to talk about the past (M12).
Unreal conditionals: tenses (➜ Units 83 & 84)
M13  If my grandfather was / were still alive, he would be a hundred today.
To talk about present or future situations in unreal conditionals, we use a past tense (either 
simple or continuous) in the if-clause and would + bare inﬁnitive in the main clause. 
In unreal conditionals we don’t use the past simple or past perfect in the main clause. In 
unreal conditionals, we can also use could / might (have) instead of would (have) (e.g. 
If my grandfather was / were still alive, he might have enjoyed looking after our garden; If 
I lived out of town, I could take up horse riding.). Note that we sometimes use if ... were 
instead of if ... was (see Unit 85).
M14  If I had known how difﬁcult the job was, I wouldn’t have taken it.
When we talk about something that might have happened in the past, but didn’t, then we 
use if + past perfect and would have + past participle in the main clause. We can also use 
might / could have instead of would have in the main clause (e.g. They might have found 
a better hotel if they had driven a few more kilometres.).
M15  If Bruno wasn’t so lazy, he would have passed the exam easily.
M16  If the doctor had been called earlier, Paula would still be alive today.
In some unreal conditionals we use mixed tenses. That is, a past tense in the if-clause and 
would have + past participle in the main clause (M15), or a past perfect in the if- clause 
and would + inﬁnitive in the main clause (M16). We can use these patterns to talk about 
possible consequences if situations were or had been different. We can also use might / 
could (have) in the main clause instead of would (have) (e.g.  ... he could have passed the 
exam easily.; ... Paula might still be alive today.).
M17  If I had a more reliable car, I’d drive to Spain rather than ﬂy.
In unreal conditional sentences we don’t normally use would in an if-clause (but see  
Unit 84).
Other adverbial clauses
Other types of adverbial clause give information about place (M18), contrast (M19 and Unit 82), cause 
or reason (M20 and Unit 80), purpose (M21 and Unit 81), and result (M22 and Unit 81):
M18  Can you put it back where you found it, please?
M19  My sister is blonde, whereas my brother has dark hair.
M20  He wasn’t allowed in because he was too young.
M21  We got up early so that we could watch the sunrise.
M22  He played so badly that he was easily beaten.
240
Additional exercises
These additional exercises provide further practice of important areas from the book; each exercise covers 
grammar from two or more units. References to the relevant exercises are given at the bottom of the main 
unit exercise pages. The key can be found on p.278.
List of exercises:
Exercise 1 Present and past; simple and continuous tenses Units 1, 2 & 4
Exercise 2 Present perfect, past simple, and present perfect continuous Units 3 & 6
Exercise 3 Past perfect, past perfect continuous, and past simple Units 5 & 7
Exercise 4 The future Units 9 & 10
Exercise 5 Modals and semi-modals Units 15–20
Exercise 6 Passives Units 22–25
Exercise 7 Verb complementation: what follows verbs Units 30 & 31
Exercise 8 Reporting Units 33, 35, 36 & 38
Exercise 9 Nouns Units 40–43
Exercise 10 Articles, etc. Units 44–48
Exercise 11 Relative clauses Units 53–55
Exercise 12 Substitution and leaving out words Units 62–65
Exercise 13 Position of adjectives, adverbs and adverbial phrases Units 66, 69, 74 & 75
Exercise 14 Adverbial clauses and conjunctions Units 79–82 & 87
Exercise 15 Prepositions Units 92–94
Exercise 16 Inversion Units 99 & 100
Present and past; simple and continuous tenses  Units 1, 2 & 4
1  Complete each pair of sentences with a positive or negative form of the same verb from the 
box. Use the present simple, present continuous, past simple or past continuous. Give all 
possible answers. Use  to add any words outside the gap.
consider        expect        own        phone        prefer       
 promise         put        read        tell        weigh
1 a If I’m not too busy, I promise  to help you in the garden later today.
 b I’ll try to get over on Saturday, but I  to be there.
2 a I made a cup of coffee while she  the letter.
 b As soon as the teacher told us to start, I  through all the questions quickly.
3 a They  to reach the mountain summit by evening, but the weather was too bad.
 b We  Luisa to visit us in June if she can get a cheap ﬂ ight.
4 a Over 90% of the population now  a mobile phone.
 b I grew up in Beijing, where my father  a bookshop.
5 a I  selling my house and buying a ﬂ at.
 b Many people  her to be the ﬁ nest violinist in the country at the moment.
6 a Leo  me that you’re getting married. Congratulations!
 b Apparently Angela is very ill. They  me that she never leaves her house now.
7 a I  the theatre four times this morning, but there was no answer.
 b I  my mother twice a day when my father was in hospital.
8 a He always  his feet up on the chairs. It’s really unhygienic.
 b I ﬁ  nd it annoying that she constantly  empty milk cartons back in the fridge.
9 a  A survey has found that, surprisingly, most children  to walk to school than be 
taken by car.
 b I swam across the river, but my friends  to walk to the nearest bridge.
 10 a Nathan  over 100 kilos and really needs to take more exercise.
  b He held the ﬁ  sh in his hands as if he  it and then said, ‘It’s about 3.5 kilos.’
241
Additional exercises
Present perfect, past simple, and present perfect continuous  Units 3 & 6
2  Match the beginnings and endings. Sometimes there is more than one possibility.
1 a  I haven’t had time to phone 
Hugo today, 
 b  I didn’t have time to phone 
Hugo today,
(i) but I’ll certainly contact him before I leave 
work.
(ii) but I’ll certainly contact him some time 
tomorrow.
2 a When she was prime minister, 
Mrs Perez
 b Since she became prime 
minister, Mrs Perez
(i) has often been accused of ignoring the advice 
of her colleagues.
(ii) was often accused of ignoring the advice of 
her colleagues.
3 a I’ve watched Mamma Mia
 b I’ve been watching Mamma Mia
(i) and now I keep humming the songs to myself.
(ii) at least ten times already.
4 a I’d always wanted to own a 
Porsche
 b I won’t know if I can afford a 
Porsche
(i) until I’ve found out how much they cost.
(ii) until I found out how much they cost.
5 a Unemployment has risen
 b Unemployment has been rising
(i) by 58% since the present government came 
to power.
(ii) ever since the present government came to 
power.
6 a As soon as I’ve ﬁ  nished the book
 b As soon as I ﬁ  nished the book
(i) I’m going to have a holiday.
(ii) I started writing another one.
7 a I’ve been playing squash
 b I’ve played squash
(i) since my doctor advised me to lose weight.
(ii) a couple of times before, but I can’t get the 
hang of it.
8 a I haven’t been back to London
 b I haven’t eaten really good pasta
(i) since I lived in Italy.
(ii) since I’ve lived in Italy.
Past perfect, past perfect continuous, and past simple  Units 5 & 7
3  Complete each sentence (b) so that it has a similar meaning to sentence (a). Use a verb related 
to the italicised word in an appropriate tense (active or passive): past perfect, past perfect 
continuous or past simple. Give alternatives where possible.
1 a  The proposed new library had been under discussion for almost three years at the time an 
appropriate site became available.
 b At the time an appropriate site became available, they had been discussing the
  proposed new library for almost three years.
2 a  There had been a considerable improvement in his condition when I saw him in hospital last 
night.
 b His condition 
3 a It was announced that there was a ten-minute delay to the Toulouse train.
 b It was announced that the Toulouse train 
4 a  Thomas had been on a diet for a month when he came to stay with us, and we noticed 
immediately that he had already lost a lot of weight.
 b Thomas 
242
Additional exercises
5 a There was an expectation that Victoria would win comfortably, but she ﬁ nished third.
 b Victoria 
6 a When I reversed the car out of the garage, I did some damage to the rear number plate.
 b When I reversed the car out of the garage, I 
7 a Andrei received a promotion last week.
 b Andrei 
8 a  Rentpool had been under investigation by the tax authorities for a number of months when 
they arrested the chairman.
 b The tax authorities 
9 a The Minister made her colleagues angry when she criticised them during her speech yesterday.
 b The Minister 
 10 a  There had already been a suggestion from Emilia that the money should be spent on new 
tablet computers for the school.
  b Emilia 
The future  Units 9 & 10
4  If necessary, correct or improve the italicised verbs in these dialogues, using will, shall, going 
to, present continuous for the future, or present simple for the future.
A A: Careful, (1) you ’re going to spill your coffee.
 B: Oh, no! Too late. Now (2) I ’m going to have to change my trousers.
B A: What have you got all that wood for?
 B: (1) I ’ll build a bird table in the garden.
 A: If you need any help, let me know and (2) I ’m going to give you a hand.
C A: (1) Shall you be able to come over on the 3rd? We (2) have a barbecue.
 B:  Just a minute, (3) I ’m going to have a look in my diary. No, I’m sorry. (4) I’m meeting some 
friends in town that day.
D A: Did you know that David (1) is going to go to New Zealand this summer?
 B: Yes, I heard. I’m really sorry he (2) doesn’t come to see us.
 A: I wonder when we (3) see him again?
 B: Well, he certainly (4) won’t be back before Christmas.
E A: I (1) take Aunt Lucy to the station later. Do you want a lift into town, too?
 B: What time (2) does her train go?
 A:  It (3) will be at 4:15. It (4) takes us about half an hour to get there if there isn’t too much 
trafﬁ c.
 B:  Well you should start out early. Apparently, (5) we ’ll have heavy snow this afternoon. In fact, 
thanks for your offer, but I think (6) I’m going to stay at home in the warm.
Modals and semi-modals  Units 15–20
5  Underline the best answers from each group in italics.
1 A:  I’ve spent most of the morning trying to ﬁ x my washing machine, but I seem to have made it 
worse.
 B:  You ought to ask / may ask / ought to have asked me to come over and take a look at it. I would 
have been / should be / would be happy to help. But I suppose it’s too late now!
2 The taxi needs to / should / would be here in a couple of minutes. We’d better / ’ve better / ’d 
better to get ready to go.
3 My daughter wouldn’t / won’t / may not eat carrots. She hates the taste of them. I don’t have to 
/ ’m not able to / can’t think of any way of getting her to eat them. But to tell the truth, I could / 
would / used to hate them when I was young, too.
243
Additional exercises
4 A:  We’re completely lost! I ’m not able to / can’t / mustn’t ﬁ nd any of the street names around 
here on the map.
 B:  We must have / have got to have / can have taken the wrong turning at the trafﬁ c lights about 
a kilometre back.
5 You haven’t got to / needn’t / mustn’t go on the beach when the tide’s coming in. It’s very 
dangerous. You can / might / would play in the playground instead.
6 I was beginning to be concerned that I won’t / mustn’t / wouldn’t get to the station for my train. 
But I didn’t need worry / needn’t have worried / needn’t worry; Aisha turned up in good time to 
give me a lift.
7 Most headteachers today feel that parents need / should / had better play a more active part in 
the running of schools. There was a time when parents would / will / should put a lot of effort 
into fundraising for schools, but those days seem to have gone.
8 A: These trousers shrank the ﬁ  rst time I washed them.
 B: If I were you, I ought to / should / can take them back.
 A: Yes, I suppose they can / need / may give me my money back.
9 Preliminary research suggests that the bones must / have got to / used to be at least 100,000 
years old, but they would / could / can be considerably older than that.
 10 Apparently, in the future, we will be able to / can / could to get holograms of the people we’re 
talking to on our mobile phones. Of course, by the time this is common, we can / must / might  
have started using other ways of communicating.
 11 Both candidates for the job were very strong and it was hard to choose between them. I certainly 
couldn’t / mustn’t / had got to have decided which one to appoint. But fortunately, we hadn’t 
got to / didn’t have to / mustn’t make a ﬁ nal decision; the management found enough money to 
allow us to appoint both of them.
 12 You needn’t / don’t need to / mustn’t be very ﬁ t to play badminton well. It can / is able to / could 
be played by anyone who is reasonably ﬁ t and who has a good sense of timing.
Passives  Units 22–25
6  Some extracts from radio news reports are given below. Rewrite them using passive forms 
in which the italicised word is the subject of each clause. If that is italicised, use a passive 
construction with it or there.
Examples:
Picasso encouraged her to paint. → She was encouraged to paint by Picasso.
People believe that the Prime Minister will resign tomorrow. → It is believed that the Prime 
Minister will resign tomorrow.
A People are encouraging the Prime Minister to sack the Environment Minister, Maria Long, after 
someone revealed that she had received payments from a major oil company. However, in a 
statement today, the Prime Minister said: ‘My advisors tell me that the company paid Mrs Long 
the money before she joined the government. I have no intention of dismissing her.’
B A tropical storm has caused severe ﬂ ooding in the city of Chittagong in southern Bangladesh. 
Although we understand that there are no casualties, the ﬂ oods have made many thousands of 
people homeless, and people estimate the damage to property as running into millions of dollars.
C Protesters have continued to block the construction of the new ring road by tying themselves to 
trees along the proposed route. Police say that they have given the protesters two days to leave 
the area or they will arrest them.
D Conservation groups have demanded that the government should close down the nuclear power 
station after a report which said that investigators have found unacceptable levels of radiation in 
the local area.
244
Additional exercises
E The Commissioner of the Dublin police force has revealed that they have received a death threat 
against the life of President Nabon, who is visiting the capital this weekend. He says that they 
are taking the threat very seriously. People expect that security levels will be increased during the 
President’s visit.
F Someone found a man injured on a Scottish hillside this morning. People think that he fell while 
coming down a hillside in bad weather. Medical staff are treating him in hospital for leg and head 
injuries. Someone reported him missing last night when he failed to return home after a day’s 
walking.
G And now football. People expect that there will be a record crowd at tonight’s match between 
Barcelona and Real Madrid. People report that the club will give the Barcelona players a huge 
ﬁ nancial bonus if they win and people have even suggested that the club might pay them as 
much as €50,000 each.
Verb complementation: what follows verbs  Units 30 & 31
7  Underline the correct option. Sometimes both are possible.
1 He insisted to pay / on paying for the meal.
2 The interviewer started off to ask / by asking me why I wanted the job.
3 I can clearly recall his saying / him saying that he was meeting Sarah at eight o’clock.
4 The university has arranged / appointed Dr Lopez to be head of the new Medical Institute.
5 I knew I could ask / count on Hannah if I needed any help.
6 My parents are always going on at me to tidy / for to tidy up my bedroom.
7 The ticket enables you visiting / to visit both the museum and the art gallery.
8 Fatima is so small that she often has to resort to wearing children’s clothes / children’s clothes to 
get the right size.
9 We objected to their cat / their cat’s digging up our garden.
 10 The government plans to bring in new laws forcing / making parents to take more responsibility 
for the education of their children.
 11 I don’t approve of her wearing / wearing outdoor shoes in the house.
 12 Ramos was arrested when he failed him to appear / to appear in court.
 13 If you have any problems with the computer, contact Simon. It’s best if you allow / let him deal 
with them.
 14 I’ve heard a lot about Dr Lau, and I’m looking forward to hearing / to hear his talk tomorrow.
 15 Although Carmen is a doctor herself, it doesn’t entitle her to / entitle for her to special treatment, 
and she will have to join the waiting list like everyone else.
 16 We waited / waited for the storm to pass before we continued.
 17 When I was in the supermarket I noticed a man to take / noticed a man take a packet off the shelf 
and hide it inside his coat.
 18 We invited / refused Lisa to come to the party.
 19 I overheard her tell / telling Aleksi that she was seriously ill.
 20 She gave up work so that she could focus on looking / look after her children.
 21 We were unhappy in England, and even discussed / talked of emigrating to New Zealand.
 22 The lizard is amazingly well adapted to live / to living in very dry and windy conditions.
 23 Another increase in the price of petrol would discourage me from using / from using my car.
245
Additional exercises
Reporting  Units 33, 35, 36 & 38
8  Complete each report using a noun from the box followed by a that-clause or to-inﬁ nitive 
clause. Give both alternatives if possible.
advice        complaint        conclusion        confession        decision        prediction
promise        refusal        reply         statement         threat        warning
1 ‘The government has decreased taxation every year since we came to power,’ stated the 
President.
 Opposition leaders have challenged the President’s statement that the government  
  have / had decreased taxation every year since they came to power.
2 Karen said, ‘I’ve decided not to go to university next year.’ We were disappointed with 
Karen’s decision  .
3 ‘The Earth will pass through the tail of a comet within the next ﬁ ve years,’ predicted Professor 
Adams.
 Considerable media attention has been focused on  .
4 ‘We said that we would dismiss the strikers if they didn’t return to work, and we have now done 
that.’
 The company has carried out  .
5 ‘You should delegate more of your work to your secretary,’ Nicky was advised by her boss.
 Nicky decided to follow  .
6 ‘I’ll pick you up at ten,’ Jason promised.
 Jason didn’t turn up until eleven, despite  .
7 ‘Professor Jones doesn’t know what he’s talking about,’ Rob concluded.
 I wasn’t surprised by  .
8 ‘My dinner is cold!’
 We decided to ignore Dan’s  .
9 ‘We will not negotiate over the ownership of the land!’
 I was astonished by  .
 10 ‘Small children should be kept indoors until pollution levels have decreased,’ the Health Minister 
has warned.
  The Health Minister has issued  .
 11 ‘I’ve never used a computer before,’ she confessed.
  I was surprised by  .
 12 ‘Where’s Bethany?’ I asked Zeb. ‘I don’t know,’ he replied.
  When I asked Zeb where Bethany was  .
Nouns  Units 40–43
9  Complete each sentence with an appropriate present simple form (singular or plural) of the 
verb in brackets. If both singular and plural forms are possible, give both.
1 I’ve been trying to sell my car for ages, but nobody  to buy it. (want)
2 A lettuce and a carrot  all I need to make the salad. (be)
3 A lot of students  in the old houses near the university. (live)
4 All of the scientiﬁ c evidence  to the conclusion that increasing use of pesticides in 
farming is damaging our health. (point)
5 The university  to appoint lecturers who already have a PhD. (prefer)
6 She’s one of those people who  just sitting in the sun on holiday. (love)
7 The ofﬁ ce staff  that they have been treated badly by management. (claim)
8 All of my children  to the same school. (go)
246
Additional exercises
9 A lot of cheaper furniture nowadays  in pieces inside a ﬂ at box for you to build 
yourself. (come)
 10 In France, the media  more respectful of the privacy of celebrities than in Britain. (be)
 11 Currently, 16% of the workforce  jobless. (be)
 12 It’s a really quiet town at night. Everything  at around 10 o’clock. (shut)
 13 The police  that the ﬁ re was caused deliberately. (suspect)
 14 The majority of the children in the class  under ﬁ ve years old. (be)
 15 Although the bracelet might be worth something, none of the other jewellery  to 
be of great value. (appear)
 16 The stairs  quite steep, so be careful how you go down. (be)
 17 What worries me about the car  the problems we’ve been having with the brakes. (be)
 18 The United Nations  to send a team of doctors to investigate the outbreak of TB. 
(plan)
 19 One of the arguments in favour of the new airport  that it will bring jobs to the 
area. (be)
 20 Many people have speculated on the reasons for the southern population movements in the 
Indian subcontinent during the 15th century, but none of the historical records identiﬁ ed so far 
 an answer. (provide)
 21 It’s a charity performance, so none of the actors  a fee for taking part. (get)
 22 Every letter and parcel  carefully checked before posting to make sure it has the 
correct address. (be)
 23 My parents want to move to Spain, but neither of them  Spanish. (speak)
 24 A: Where are the scissors?   B: I think either Leyla or Miguel  borrowed them. (have)
 25 Most people would agree that the criteria  not of equal importance. (be)
 26 The economics of nuclear power  become more and more difﬁ cult in the last 
decade. (have)
 27 Whoever had contact with the patient  to be found and vaccinated against polio. 
(have)
 28 A: I’ve got to walk all the way to my uncle’s house, and he lives about two miles away.   
  B: But two miles  far. (be / not)
 29 A recent survey shows that around 10% of all cars  dangerous to drive. (be)
 30 Phonetics  one of the options you can take in the second year of the course. (be)
Articles,  etc.  Units 44–48
10  Complete the sentences using the words from the box. Which one option can complete all 
three sentences a, b and c?
a / an        one        some        the        ‘zero article’ (–)
1 a Could you look after my cat while I’m away on holiday? It’s only for  week.
 b  Jules lives less than  mile from school, so he can get up at eight o’clock and still 
be at school by nine.
 c  When I arrived, Alice was sitting in  corner of the room and Jake was sitting in 
the other. I could tell that they had been arguing.
2 a  vulture feeds primarily on dead animals.
 b  Eleni has arthritis, and her doctor has suggested that she should spend as much time as 
possible in  warm climate.
 c Fiona has decided she wants to be  accountant.
3  a A: How should I get to the town centre from here?
  B: Well, you could walk, but catching a bus is probably  quickest.
 b The World Wide Fund for Nature organised a major campaign to save  tiger.
 c  washing machine has had a huge impact on people’s lives since it was invented.
247
Additional exercises
4 a A: Rafael Nadal is visiting our school next week to talk about tennis.
  B:  You mean  Rafael Nadal – the famous tennis player? Can you get his 
autograph for me?
 b It was hot in the house, so she opened all the windows to let in  fresh air.
 c Large areas of Canada are still covered by  forest.
5 a She was made  Chief Executive Ofﬁ cer in 2002.
 b Do you want  sugar in your coffee?
 c You can buy  mobile phones for as little as £10.
6 a  500 people were at the meeting.
 b Despite years of research, we still don’t understand the signiﬁ  cance of  dreams.
 c It is a sad fact that  money buys political power in many societies.
7 a  earthquake in the south of the country has left thousands homeless.
 b I love having holidays at  seaside.
 c Do you remember  Wilmotts? They used to live opposite us.
8 a   bicycle is an important means of transport for many people with no access to 
public transport.
 b We only stayed in Oslo for  night, but we really liked the place. 
 c  Juan owns a painting that he claims is  Picasso.
9 a I felt ﬁ  ne when I woke up, but by  evening I had a fever.
 b The temperature at  midday reached over 40 °C.
 c It’s probably easiest to contact me by  email.
 10 a  My history teacher at school –  Mrs Bullenski – was always giving us advice on 
how to improve our examination skills.
  b  I’ll just spend  day or two in Singapore and then go on to Australia for three 
weeks.
  c It was  day that would remain in my memory forever.
Relative clauses  Units 53–55
11  Rewrite each sentence including the information in brackets in a relative clause. Give all 
possible relative pronouns, but if you can leave them out, put them in brackets. Use commas 
where necessary.
1 Later in the programme we have an interview with Laura Dekker. (in 2012 she became the 
youngest solo round-the-world sailor) Later in the programme we have an interview with
 Laura Dekker, who in 2012 became the youngest solo round-the-world sailor.
2 Carla’s restaurant is very good value. (it serves a range of Mediterranean dishes)
3 The New Zealand rugby team are clear favourites to win the match. (all of its members weigh 
over 100 kilos)
4 Chloe brought home a kitten. (she’d found it in the park)
5 The story is about a teenage boy. (his ambition is to become an astronaut)
6 Paul has got a job with Empirico. (its main product is electric light bulbs)
7 Politicians should give more consideration to the working people. (they represent them)
8 Among the group of people was Professor Fischer. (I had last seen him in Munich 20 years 
earlier)
9 I live on a small road. (it leads down to the river)
 10 Monet’s earlier paintings are in a new exhibition in New York. (many have never been seen in the 
USA before)
 11 Ian McIver has become managing director of Europe’s largest food retailer. (his ﬁ  rst job was 
selling vegetables in a market)
 12 Kaspar has a new girlfriend. (she works in the library)
 13 My Volkswagen Golf is a very reliable car. (I bought it in 2006)
 14 Bronwen Brookes will be present at its ofﬁ  cial opening. (the Brookes art gallery is named after her)
248
Additional exercises
Substitution and leaving out words  Units 62–65
12  Underline the appropriate alternatives. Sometimes both are possible.
1 He has a shave every morning, but you wouldn’t think he did / had.
2 The developers pulled down the clock tower to make way for the new road. In doing so / so doing, 
they destroyed one of the ﬁ nest examples of 17th century architecture in the country.
3 A: Ben won’t be coming this weekend.   B: But he promised so / promised he would.
4 A: It looks like Vettel is going to win again.   B: It appears / appears so.
5 A: I didn’t know you cycled to work.   B: Yes, I always do / do so.
6 I don’t like eating shellﬁ sh, and never have / have done.
7 They asked me to go ﬁ shing with them, but I didn’t want / didn’t want to.
8 A: Will it take you long to ﬁ x it?   B: Well, it might do / do so. I’m not sure yet.
9 A: Do you think Fred will be up by now?   B: I doubt that he will / doubt so.
 10 A: Dad won’t mind us borrowing the car, will he?   B: No, I don’t suppose so / suppose not.
 11 Just park the car wherever you want to / want.
 12 A: Has Rachel arrived yet?   B: No, I don’t think she has done / has.
 13 Karl had to choose between working much longer hours and moving to another part of the 
country. He had never faced such a dilemma / a such dilemma before.
 14 He owns much more land than I do so / do.
 15 We’d like to go to Canada to see Ellie, but we can’t afford to / afford.
 16 A: I imagine the information is kept on computer somewhere.   B: I would expect so / expect.
 17 I don’t know whether my parents want me to go to Norway, but I suspect not / don’t suspect.
 18 A: Will she expect us to get the job ﬁ  nished by the weekend?   
  B: I certainly don’t hope so / hope not.
 19 A: There’s no answer. I suppose she might have left home by now.   
  B: Yes, I suppose she might have / might.
 20 The car’s in good condition. They told so / told me so at the garage.
 21 I didn’t want Luca to climb the mountain, but he was determined to / determined.
 22 A: My mother was really angry.   B: But didn’t you expect her to / to be?
 23 A: It doesn’t look like the rain’s going to stop soon.   B: I don’t guess / guess not.
 24 A: Are you going to the library today?   B: I might do / might be.
Position of adjectives, adverbs and adverbial phrases  Units 66, 69, 74 & 75
13  Are the italicised words and phrases in the correct position? If not, suggest a change of position 
or rewrite the text if necessary.
a I every so often  leave work early and go to a performance in the local concert hall. It’s very close 
to my ofﬁ ce, in the opposite building. Usually they rather are good, but yesterday’s, given by a 
singer and pianist, was a total disaster. The singer with wonderful control began to sing. But when 
the pianist started to play, it sounded awful. At ﬁ rst I thought he was badly playing, but then it 
became obvious that the piano completely was out of tune. They stopped and discussed brieﬂ y 
the problem. They couldn’t continue clearly, and they left the stage unhappily. Naturally, all the 
present people felt sorry for them. I’m sure the responsible person for tuning the piano will be 
severely reprimanded.
b I just was going out to work this morning when the postman pushed through my letterbox a 
letter. It was from Mara, who writes from time to time. The letter said that she has to come to 
Bristol to visit her unwell uncle. She is one of his few remaining relatives. She wants us to meet 
and asked if I could suggest a time possible. Well, I for a couple of years haven’t seen her, so I was 
really pleased. We ﬁ rst met at university. We have alike interests, so always we ﬁ nd a lot to talk 
about. The included photos in the letter showed that she hadn’t changed since I last saw her. I 
spent so long reading the letter that I nearly was late for work.
249
Additional exercises
Adverbial clauses and conjunctions  Units 79–82 & 87
14  Match the ideas in (i) and (ii) and use the word in brackets to write either a single sentence (as 
in 1) or two sentences (as in 2), as appropriate. Note that you can put the idea in (ii) ﬁ rst in the 
sentence.
(i)
1 I knew there was something wrong 
2 prepare the remaining vegetables 
3 his wife is really small 
4 only about 100 people attended
5 I can’t afford a coat like that 
6 I’m determined to ﬁ nish the report
7 you’ll have to walk all the way from 
the station
8 I stayed until the end 
9 her husband would never ﬁ nd it 
 10  I’ve been running about 
200 kilometres a week
(ii)
a  I found the ﬁ lm boring
b  Johan must weigh over 120 kilos
c  to prepare for the marathon
d  she said she was feeling ﬁ ne 
e  I don’t like the style
f  leave the carrots to cool for a few minutes 
g  make sure you catch the last bus at 11:00
h  I have to stay at work until midnight
i  she hid the letter between the pages of a book
j   there had been a lot of publicity about the 
meeting
1 (even though) (+ d) I knew there was something wrong, even though she said she was 
 feeling fine. or Even though she said she was feeling fine I knew there was
 something wrong.
2 (meanwhile) (+ f) Leave the carrots to cool for a few minutes. Meanwhile, prepare
 the remaining vegetables.
3 (whereas)
4 (even so)
5 (besides)
6 (even if)
7 (otherwise)
8 (although)
9 (so that)
 10 (in order to)
Prepositions  Units 92–94
15  Add the missing prepositions in the correct places after the italicised words.
  with
1 Personally, I don’t agree  fox hunting, although I know that you approve it.
2 There seems to be little likelihood Williamson winning Wimbledon because of her inability play 
well on grass tennis courts.
3 Our plan is to split the organisation into a number of small units. This will improve our prospects 
competing with more specialised companies.
4 I ran Danny in town the other day. He asked your email address, so he’ll probably be in touch 
with you.
5 Jack takes great pride never throwing anything. He always says that one day he’ll ﬁ nd a use for 
things.
6 Although Professor Martinez knows a great deal meteorology, even he can’t account the unusual 
weather we have been having over the last few weeks.
7 There has been a great improvement the behaviour of children in the school. This has resulted the 
headteacher’s idea involving them in decision-making.
8 Even though Charlotte didn’t act my advice and follow a career in medicine, I’m full of 
admiration her determination train to be a vet.
250
Additional exercises
Inversion  Units 99 & 100
16  Rewrite each sentence with a similar meaning starting with a word / phrase from the box 
followed by inversion of the verb and the subject.
Had        Hardly         Little         Not for one moment        Only if        Only in
Seldom        Should        So        Under no circumstances        Such        Were
1 I didn’t imagine that the boss had called me into her ofﬁ ce to ﬁ re me. Little did I imagine   
 that the boss had called me into her office to fire me.
2 The police will only investigate the matter further if an ofﬁ cial complaint is made.
 
 
3 The instructions were so complicated, that it was impossible to assemble the machine.
 
 
4 If we had known how ill Rob was, we would have taken him straight to the hospital.
 
 
5 The wind was so strong that all the trees in the park were blown down.
 
 
6 She didn’t often regret her lack of formal education, although she was sometimes aware of gaps 
in her knowledge.
 
 
7 You should only phone for an ambulance in an emergency.
 
 
8 There was never any disagreement between us.
 
 
9 If it were not for ﬁ nancial assistance from the government, the museum would have closed long 
ago.
 
 
 10 They had only just ﬁ  nished eating before a waiter started to clear away the plates.
 
 
 11 Children should never be allowed into the room without adult supervision.
 
 
 12 If the bridge is ever built, it will be welcomed by the local community.
 
 
251
UNIT 1
1. 1
2 a ’m (am) measuring
 b measures
3 a doubt
 b doubt
4 a  is currently attracting (‘attracts’ is 
also possible) 
 b attract
5 a doesn’t like
 b  ’m (am) not liking (‘don’t like’ is also 
possible)
6 a ’re (are) ﬁ  tting
 b doesn’t ﬁ  t
7 a feels
 b  ’m (am) not feeling (‘don’t feel’ is 
also possible)
8 a  consists of (‘consists only of’ would 
also be possible)
 b consists of
9 a  ’s (is) sounding (‘sounds’ is also 
possible)
 b sounds
10 a ’s (is) having
 b has
1.2
1 apologise  /  ’m apologising 
2 admit  /  ’m admitting 
3 don’t suggest  / ’m not suggesting 
(both possible)
4 now realise  / ’m now realising (both 
possible)
5 confess  / ’ m confessing 
6  consider   / ’m considering
7  do you ﬁ nd  / are you ﬁ nding (both 
possible) 
8 know  /   ’m knowing  
9  don’t guarantee  / ’m not guaranteeing 
(both possible)
10 promise  /   ’m promising 
UNIT 2
2. 1
1 shoots, are attacking
2 arrives, is waiting, says
3 is playing, stands, starts
2.2 
Possible answers
2 I gather Vegecorp are going to sack a 
thousand workers. 
3 I understand we’re going to have a 
new public holiday for the President’s 
birthday.
4 Ed tells me Bruno’s crashed his car 
again.
5 Julia says she’s got a new job.
6 They say they’ve identiﬁ  ed a gene 
which causes some people to overeat. 
2.3
2 You’re forever asking me for money.
3 You’re constantly criticising my 
driving.
4 You’re continually changing your mind.
5 You’re forever moaning about (your) 
work. 
2.4
The most likely verbs are given:
1 a  we’re (are) usually eating (‘we 
usually eat’ is also possible)
 b don’t eat 
2 a plays (‘is playing’ is also possible) 
 b  ’re (are) constantly playing 
(‘constantly play’ is also possible)
3 a  I’m normally taking (‘I normally 
take’ is also possible. It would 
suggest, however, that this is the 
time they leave home. Present 
continuous suggests that they are 
on the way to school at 8:30.)
 b takes
UNIT 3
3. 1
1 went
2 ’ve (have) had 
3 wore
4 ’ve (have) spent 
5 overslept
6 haven’t read
3.2
1 hasn’t wanted – fell 
2 has worked – hasn’t had
3 rescued – has been
4 has happened – spoke
5 have been able – have felt
6 has improved – has been
3.3
1 a  signed  ’ve (have) signed
 b  signed ✓
2 a  ﬁ  nished  ’ve (have) ﬁ nished
 b  ﬁ  nished ✓
3 a  got ✓
 b  got  have got
4 a  heard ✓
 b  heard  ’ve (have) heard
3.4
The most appropriate tenses are given
1 has visited
2 has closed ( or has been closed; present 
perfect passive) – died
3 has dropped – has fallen
4 have been stolen (present perfect 
passive) – insisted – held
UNIT 4
4. 1
2 was hoping – gave 
3 lived – was spending / was living – 
spent
4 started – was checking in 
5 was looking – saw
6 came – was showing 
7 was playing – broke
8 went off – lit
9 wasn’t listening (‘didn’t listen’ is also 
possible) – was explaining (‘explained’ 
is also possible)
10 added – tasted
11 wasn’t watching (‘didn’t watch’ is also 
possible) – was dreaming (‘dreamt’ is 
also possible) 
12 pushed – ran
4.2
1 ‘was getting’ and ‘got’ are both 
possible. The past simple suggests that 
one event followed the other: I got in 
and then the lights went off. The past 
continuous suggests that the lights 
went off as I was in the process of 
getting ready to get into the bath.
4 ‘was checking in’ or ‘checked in’ are 
both possible with a similar meaning. 
Using the past continuous presents 
‘checking in’ as the background event 
which was going on as the couple 
started to chat to him. 
7 ‘was playing’ and ‘played’ are both 
possible. The past continuous suggests 
that this was a temporary rather than 
a regular arrangement. 
11 ‘didn’t watch’ and ‘dreamt’ are 
also possible. However, the past 
continuous emphasises that ‘not 
watching’ and ‘dreaming’ went on at 
the same time and seems more likely 
here.
4.3
1 was buying
2 saw
3 turned
4 was slowly putting (Past simple in 3 
and past continuous in 4 seem most 
likely here as ‘turned round’ describes 
a completed action and ‘was slowly 
putting’ describes the action that was 
going on at that time. However, past 
continuous is also possible in 3 and 
past simple is also possible in 4.)
5 was carrying
6 walked
7 picked up
8 thought
9 was looking
Key to Exercises
251
252
Key to Exercises
10 dropped
11 had
12 noticed
13 was watching
14 hurried 
15 were walking / walked (similar 
meaning)
16 ran
UNIT 5
5. 1
events order 
events are 
mentioned 
in text
order 
of 
events
I moved… 2 2
I learnt… 5 6
The property 
developer 
decided…
98
I heard… 8 9
I ﬁrst saw the 
old house 
13
A property 
developer 
bought it 
64
I nearly gave 
up…
77
I put together 
enough 
money…
45
It was empty 3 1
The ﬁrst past ‘point of reference’ is ‘When 
I ﬁrst saw the old house’. Events before 
this are in the past perfect: ‘I had just 
moved’… ‘It had been empty’.
The second past ‘point of reference’ is 
when ‘I learnt…’. Events before this are in 
the past perfect: ‘I had put together’ … 
‘had bought’. Notice that we could use ‘I 
put together’ here as the order of events is 
made clear by ‘By the time…’.
The third past ‘point of reference’ is ‘…
when I heard that the house was for sale 
again’. Events before this are in the past 
perfect: ‘I had nearly given up’… ‘The 
property developer had decided…’.
5.2
1 had met
2 had been / went 
3 had taken / took
4 had seen
5 had lost 
6 had found
7 had cheated / cheated
8 had made up
9 had gone / went 
10 hadn’t heard
11 had ﬁnished / ﬁnished
12 had eaten (Note: In North American 
English ‘ate’ would also be possible.)
5.3
2 Lara hadn’t intended to become a 
dentist … 
3 I had expected the operation to be 
painful …
4 I hadn’t thought of cooking rabbit …
5 He hadn’t meant to insult her … ( or 
He hadn’t meant it to be an insult to 
her …)
UNIT 6
6. 1
1 a  ’s (has) been staying (‘has stayed’ is 
also possible)
 b ’ve (have) stayed
2 a  have been stopping (‘have stopped’ 
is also possible)
 b has stopped
3 a haven’t read
 b  ’ve (have) been reading (‘have read’ 
is also possible)
4 a  has been giving (‘has given’ is also 
possible)
 b has given
5 a haven’t swum
 b ’ve (have) been swimming
6 a  have been putting (‘have put’ is also 
possible)
 b has (or ‘have’) put
8 a has disappeared
 b  have been disappearing (‘have 
disappeared’ is also possible) 
6.2
a 
1  has been claiming  has claimed
2  have been dying  died
3   have been making ✓ (‘have made’ is 
also possible)
4   have been producing  ’ve (have) 
produced
5  have been awarding  awarded
6   have been looking ✓ (‘have looked’ 
and ‘looked’ are also possible)
7   have also been exploring ✓ (‘have also 
explored’ and ‘also explored’ are also 
possible)
8  has been making  has / have made / 
made
b
1  has been investing  invested
2   has been announcing  has announced
3   has been increasing ✓ (‘has increased’ 
is also possible)
4   has been running ✓ (‘has run’ is also 
possible)
5   has been neglecting ✓ (‘has 
neglected’ is also possible)
6   has been cutting ✓ (‘has cut’ is also 
possible)
7  have been ﬁnding  have found
8   have been planning ✓ (‘have planned’ 
is also possible)
9  have been speaking  spoke
10   have also been writing  have also 
written / also wrote
UNIT 7
7.1
1 a  had only been working (‘had only 
worked’ is also possible)
 b had ﬁnally worked
2 a had carried
 b  had been carrying (‘had carried’ is 
also possible) 
3 a had applied
 b  had been applying (‘had applied’ is 
also possible)
4 a had ﬂown
 b had been ﬂying
7. 2
1 had been trying (‘had tried’ is also 
possible)
2 had visited
3 had cost 
4 had been writing (‘had written’is also 
possible)
5 had been worrying (‘had worried’ is 
also possible) 
6 had arrived
7 had always believed
8 had been talking
The past continuous is more likely in 8 
(We were talking …).
7. 3
1 ✓
2 had been taken
3 ✓ (Note that ‘What happened?’ is also 
possible)
4 had just heard 
5 ✓
6 had been ﬁshing 
7 ✓
8 hadn’t wanted
9 ✓
10 had collapsed
UNIT 8
8. 1
The most likely verbs and tenses are given.
2 got / arrived
3 feel / am feeling (Present simple and 
present continuous have a similar 
meaning here.)
4 go
5 know
6 spent
7 texted
8 was waiting
9 got
10 felt / was feeling (Past simple and past 
continuous have a similar meaning 
here.)
253
Key to Exercises
11 got
12 enjoy / is enjoying (Present simple 
and present continuous have a similar 
meaning here, although the present 
continuous may suggest that she is 
not living in Adelaide permanently.)
13 is looking
14 seems
15 doesn’t get on / isn’t getting 
on (Present simple and present 
continuous have a similar meaning 
here, although the present continuous 
suggests that this is a temporary 
problem.)
16 complain / are constantly complaining 
(Note the word order.)
17 is starting
18 asked
19 am looking
20 hear / heard (Present simple and past 
simple have a similar meaning here.)
8.2
The most likely tenses are given.
2 said (‘has said’ is also possible, but less 
likely here)
3 heard / had heard
4 returned / had returned
5 came / had come
6 was / had been
7 left
8 appointed
9 ﬁnished
10 have won
11 accused
12 has disappointed
13 has spent
8.3
1 ‘Has he had’ or ‘Has he been having’ 
are more likely
2 ✓
3 thought / had thought
4 has worked / has been working
5 had been trying
6 did you go
7 heard
8 ✓ (‘went’ is also possible) 
9 ✓ (‘checked’ is also possible)
10 have said / said
11 ✓ (‘have given’ is also possible)
12 have told (‘told’ is also possible)
UNIT 9
9. 1
2   ✓ (prediction based on opinion / past 
experience)
3   ✓ (decision made at moment of 
speaking)
4   Will you take up  Are you going to 
take up (prediction based on present 
evidence)
5   ✓ (prediction based on opinion / past 
experience)
6   ’ll be  ’s going to be (decision already 
made)
7   ’ll have  ’re going to have (prediction 
based on present evidence)
8   ’ll sell  ’re going to sell (prediction 
based on present evidence)
9   ’ll cut  ’m going to cut (decision 
already made)
10   ’ll be sick  ’s going to be sick 
(prediction based on present 
evidence); ’ll feel ✓ (prediction based 
on opinion / past experience)
11   ’ll leave  ’m going to leave (decision 
already made); will you tell ✓ (or 
‘are you going to tell’; asking about 
something planned); ’ll try ✓ (decision 
made at moment of speaking)
12   ’ll have  ’m going to have (decision 
already made);  ’ll see  ’re going to 
see (decision already made); ’ll sort 
out ✓ (decision made at moment of 
speaking) 
13   ✓ (decision made at moment of 
speaking)
14   ’m going to have  ’ll have (decision 
made at moment of speaking)
15   ✓ (prediciton based on opinion / past 
experience)
16   ’ll build  ’m going to build (decision 
already made)
9.2 
Example verbs are given
2 ’re going to plant (main clause action 
does not depend on action in the if-
clause)
3 ’ll hurt / ’re going to hurt (conditional 
– negative)
4 will … buy (request)
5 will start / stop (logical consequence) 
6 ’m going to see (main clause action 
does not depend on action in the if-
clause)
7 ’ll be sacked / ’s going to be sacked 
(conditional – negative)
8 ’ll hear (ability)
UNIT 10
10. 1 
1 get (ﬁxed event; ‘will get’ is also 
possible)
2 will look after (less routine 
arrangement)
3 rains (with ‘in case’)
4 will give out (less routine 
arrangement)
5 goes (ﬁxed event; ‘will go’ is also 
possible)
6 starts (ﬁxed event; ‘will start’ is also 
possible)
7 stops (with ‘provided’) 
8 change (with ‘what if’)
9 will miss (prediction)
10 lend (with ‘unless’)
11 play (or ‘plays’) (ﬁxed event;‘will play’ 
is also possible)
12 will accept (prediction)
13 want (with ’supposing’)
14 read (with ‘by the time’)
10.2
1 (c)  is leaving  (prediction perhaps 
based on opinion, experience or 
present evidence). ‘Will leave’ and ‘is 
going to leave’ have a similar meaning 
here.
2 (a)  will buy  (planned future 
event). ‘I’m going to buy’ suggests 
an intention without a deﬁnite 
arrangement; ‘I’m buying’ suggests a 
deﬁnite arrangement – perhaps the 
speaker has bought the car and is 
simply picking it up next week.
3 (b)  are going to pick ; (c)  are picking  
(offer; decision made at moment of 
speaking)
4 (a)  will drive  (planned future event). 
‘I’m going to drive’ suggests a personal 
intention; ‘I’m driving’ suggests a more 
deﬁnite arrangement – perhaps the 
speaker has been told to go there by 
their employer.
5 (c)  is cutting  (permanent future 
situation). ‘Will cut’ and ‘is going to 
cut’ have a similar meaning here. 
6 (b) am going to call ; (c)  am calling  
(promise; decision made at time of 
speaking)
7 (a)  will serve  (planned future event). 
As the present continuous for the 
future suggests a deﬁnite arrangement, 
using ‘I am serving lunch’ in this 
context suggests ‘… and I am not 
changing what I plan to do’, perhaps 
showing some irritation or annoyance.
8 (c)  are starving  (no control over 
predicted event). ‘Will starve’ and ‘are 
going to starve’ have a similar meaning 
here. However, as ‘will’ is often used to 
talk about future facts, it may express 
more certainty in this context.
10.3
1
1 is joining ✓ joins ✗ (will join ✓ is going 
to join ✓)
2 are liking ✗ like ✗ (will like ✓ are going 
to like ✓)
3 is coming ✓ comes ✓ (will come 
✓ [but present continuous, present 
simple or‘ be going to’ are more 
natural here] is going to come ✓)
4 is giving ✗ gives ✗ (will give ✓ is going 
to give ✗)
2
1 is / are sacking ✓ sack ✗ (will sack ✓ 
[but present continuous or ‘be going 
to’ are more natural here] is / are going 
to sack ✓)
254
Key to Exercises
2 are closing ✗ close ✓ (will close ✗ are 
going to close ✗)
3 are building ✓ build ✗ (will build ✓ 
[but present continuous or ‘be going 
to’ are more natural here] are going to 
build ✓)
4 are seeing ✗ see ✗ (will see ✓ are going 
to see ✗)
UNIT 11
11. 1
1 a  will be leaving (‘will leave’ is also 
possible)
 b will leave 
2 a  Will you be working (‘Will you work’ 
is also possible)
 b ’ll work
3 a  won’t be using (‘won’t use’ is also 
possible)
 b won’t use
4 a ’ll (will) give
 b  will be giving (‘will give’ is also 
possible)
5 a won’t move
 b  will be moving (‘will move’ is also 
possible)
11.2
2 If the company is making a proﬁt by 
the end of the year then we will have 
achieved the objective we set ourselves 
when we took over. 
3 In two years’ time Morneau will have 
been acting for 50 years, and shows no 
sign of retiring from the theatre. (‘will 
have acted’ is also possible)
4 I am conﬁdent that I will have ﬁnished 
the report before the end of the week.
5 This book on Proust is really difﬁcult. 
On Saturday I will have been reading it 
for a month, and I’m still only half way. 
6 As delegates who arrived early will 
have been discovering, there have been 
some late changes to the conference 
programme. (‘will have discovered’ is 
also possible)
11.3
1 will have closed
2 will be enjoying
3 will be leaving
4 will be arriving
5 will have been
6 will have been planning
7 won’t be spending
8 will be keeping
9 will all be going
UNIT 12
12. 1
1 is to be staged (‘will be staged’ is also 
possible)
2 will stop 
3 is to merge / is to be merged (‘will 
merge’ or ‘will be merged’ are also 
possible)
4 will rise
5  is to be replaced (‘will be replaced’ is 
also possible)
6 is to retire; is to be succeeded (‘will 
retire’ and ‘will be succeeded’ are also 
possible)
7 will become
8 are to receive (‘will receive’ is also 
possible)
9 are to be created (‘will be created’ is 
also possible)
10 will increase
12.2
1 are to have (see section B)
2 is to start / is about to start (A/C)
3 wins (B)
4 enjoy (B)
5 ’m just about to go (C)
6 recovers (B)
7 is to keep (B)
8 is to resign / is about to resign (C) (‘is 
about to resign’ emphasises that he 
will resign very soon)
9 are about to get (C)
10 is to be improved (B)
UNIT 13
13. 1
3 due to return
4 sure to provide
5 set to launch
6 on the verge of becoming
7 on the point of signing
8  sure to face
9  due to undergo
10 on the verge of quitting
11 set to make
12 on the brink of going
13.2
2 propose / ’m proposing to deal
3 expect  / ’re expecting to ﬁnish 
4 aim / ’m aiming to study 
5 resolves to give up
6 guarantee to ﬁnd
7 intend / ’m intending to move 
13.3
1 will
2 shan’t / won’t (‘won’t’ is more natural)
3 will
4 shall / will 
5 won’t 
UNIT 14
14. 1
1 was going to do
2 will be
3 ✓
4 would have shown
5 ✓ (‘was to be announced’ is also 
possible)
6 is about to start
7 ✓
8 was supposed; was about to ask
9 ✓ (‘am going to see’ is also possible)
10 is to be used
11 ✓ (‘were meeting’ is also possible)
12 would cause
Past or present tense forms are possible in 
5, 9 and 11.
14.2
1 a
2 b 
3 a 
4 b 
5 a 
6 b 
7 a 
8 a 
9 b 
10 a
UNIT 15
15. 1
1 can (A: before passive)
2 were able to (B: single past 
achievement)
3 could / were able to (A)
4 Could you (B: with ‘understand’ ‘could’ 
is more natural)
5 can’t (A: ‘know how to’)
6 can (A: happening as speaking)
7 were able to (B: single past 
achievement)
8 could hardly (B: with ‘hardly ‘could’ is 
more natural)
9 could (B: with ‘smell’ ‘could’ is more 
natural)
10 Can you / Are you able to (A) 
11 can (A: before passive)
12 was able to (B: single past 
achievement)
13 couldn’t (B: negative sentence; 
‘couldn’t’ is more natural)
14 was able to (B: single past 
achievement)
15.2
a
1 can
2 couldn’t
3 can
4 can’t
5 couldn’t / weren’t allowed to
6 can’t
7 were allowed to
b
1 can 
2 wasn’t allowed to / couldn’t
3 was allowed to
4 could
5 could
6 can’t
7 was allowed to
255
Key to Exercises
UNIT 16
16. 1
1 will spend 
2 had 
3 would exercise 
4 found 
5 will cause 
6 would rarely sit
7 will know 
8 will probably be / would probably be
16.2
1 ✗ used to ✓ (changed past state)
2 ✓ (‘used to’ is also possible) 
3 ✗ used to ✓ (changed past state)
4 ✓ (‘would’ is not possible) (changed 
past state)
5 ✓ (‘would’ is also possible) 
6 ✗ met ✓ (number of times speciﬁed)
16.3
1 will have watched
2 would have approved
3 would have hurt
4 will have heard 
5 would have preferred 
6 will / would have noticed
7 would have bought
16.3 
Example answers
1 B: Well, if you will drive everywhere 
instead of walking, I’m not surprised.
2 B: Well, if you will spend so much time 
online, I’m not surprised.
3 B: Well, if you will wear a thick 
jumper when it’s 30 degrees, it’s not 
surprising.
UNIT 17
17 . 1
1 might (more likely than ‘may’)
2 may
3 Are you likely to … (possible answer; 
‘Might you …’ would be rather formal)
4 might (more likely than ‘may’)
5 Could (possible answer; ‘Might’ would 
be rather formal)
6 may 
17 .2
1 might have enjoyed (E: possible event 
in the past)
2 might have been trying (E: possible 
activity that went on over a period of 
time)
3  might be coming (E: possible event in 
the future)
4 might require (C: typically the case in 
the past)
5 may be moving (E: possible event in 
the future)
6 may have improved (E: possible event 
in the future)
7 might be imprisoned (C: typically the 
case in the past)
8 may have been exaggerating (E: 
possible activity that went on over a 
period of time)
9 might be punished (C: typically the 
case in the past; passive)
10 may have told (E: possible event in the 
past)
17 .3 
Possible answers
1 … at least he’s in tune. 
2 … it’s never broken down. 
3 … she has a very wide vocabulary.
5 You may / might not agree with him, …
6 She may / might not express her 
feelings openly, …
7 It may / might not sound very exciting, 
…
UNIT 18
18. 1
1 must have found
2 must be 
3 must be starting (‘must be going 
to start’ and ‘must start’ are also 
possible)
4 must have had to work (‘must have 
worked’ is also possible)
5 must have changed
6 must have to show 
7 must be taking (‘must have taken’ is 
also possible)
8 must be
18.2
2 Hannah rarely has to be asked to tidy 
her room. 
3 Have we got to hand in the homework 
tomorrow? (‘Do we have to …’ is also 
possible)
4 I didn’t have to go to the hospital after 
all. 
5 Did Ben have to go alone?
6 Adam sometimes has to start work at 
6:30. (‘Adam has sometimes got to 
start work …’ is also possible)
7 The college has to be extended to 
accommodate the growing number of 
students. (‘has got to be extended’ is 
also possible, but less likely in a formal 
context)
8 We may / might have to cancel our 
holiday because my mother is ill.
18.3
1  ✓
2   always have got to pull  always have 
to pull 
3   Have you to bang  Do you have to 
bang (‘Must you bang …’ is also 
possible but less likely)
4  ✓
5   must have to squeeze  must have had 
to squeeze / must have squeezed 
6  must leave  must have left 
7  ✓
8  mustn’t wait  didn’t have to wait
9   must be disturbed  must have been 
disturbed
10   I’ve to get  I’ve got to get / I have 
to get (Note that some people use 
‘I’ve to get’ in informal language, but 
others think this is incorrect.)
11  ✓
12  may must get  may have to get
13   I’ve to go  I must go / I have to go / 
I’ve got to go
14  must get  must be getting
15  ✓
16  have to get  must get (more likely) 
The three common expressions with ‘must’ 
are ‘I must say …’, ‘I must admit …’ (both 
used to emphasise the following point), 
and ‘needs must’ (meaning if something 
is necessary I will do it, even though I may 
not want to). 
UNIT 19
19. 1 
1 I’ll give you a lift to the station so you 
needn’t worry / bother about booking 
a taxi.
2 The questions are in the book so you 
needn’t bother to copy them down.
3 All the windows have screens so you 
needn’t panic / worry about being 
bitten by mosquitoes. 
4 Our software provides full computer 
security so you needn’t concern 
yourself with viruses. 
5 The new tax laws don’t come into 
force until next year so you needn’t 
change the details on the form.
19.2
2 We need only ( or We only need …) 
look at the rainfall ﬁgures to see the 
seriousness of the problem. (less 
formally We only need to look at …)
3 With such a lead in the opinion polls 
the Democrats need hardly bother (or 
… the Democrats hardly need bother) 
campaigning before the election. (less 
formally … the Democrats hardly need 
to bother campaigning …)
4 No one need know who paid the 
ransom to the kidnappers. (less 
formally No one needs to know who 
paid …)
5 After such a huge lottery win, he need 
never work again. (less formally … he 
never needs to work again.)
19.3
1 don’t need to
2 needn’t / don’t need to
256
Key to Exercises
3 needn’t / don’t need to
4 don’t need to
5 needn’t / don’t need to
6 don’t need to
19.4
1 You needn’t worry …
2 Do we need to make … is more likely
3 … needn’t be a problem …
4 ✓
5 I need hardly tell you …, or less 
formally I hardly need (to) tell you …
6 some people would prefer ‘needn’t’ in 
this context (see C)
7 ✓
8 … needn’t mean …
UNIT 20
20. 1
1 should / ought to win (should / ought 
to have won is also possible)
2 should I put ( more likely than … ought 
I to put …; should I have put is also 
possible)
3 should / ought to have arrived (should 
/ ought to arrive is also possible)
4 should be sent ( more likely than ought 
to be sent)
5 should be removed ( more likely than 
ought to be removed)
6 should / ought to wear 
7 should / ought to have resigned 
8  Should we answer ( more likely than 
Ought we to answer …; Should we 
have answered is also possible)
9 should go (ought to is not possible)
10 should / ought to be (should / ought to 
have been is also possible)
20.2
1 should or must; ‘must’ gives a stronger 
recommendation
2 must
3 must
4 should or must; ‘must’ gives stronger 
advice and is perhaps more likely than 
‘should’ in this context
5 should or must; ‘must’ gives a stronger 
recommendation
6 must
(2, 3 and 6 include logical conclusions, so 
we use ‘must’ not ‘should’)
20.3
1  should  must
2  ✓
3  shall  should / ought to
4  shouldn’t  ’d better not
5  ‘d better  should / ought to
6  had better not  shouldn’t / ought not 
to be  
7  ✓
8  ✓
9  ✓
10  had better  should / ought to 
UNIT 21
21. 1
1 (to be)
2 to be 
3 to be 
4 (to be)
5 (to be)
6 to be
7 to be
8 to be
9 (to be)
10 (to be) 
21.2
1 get
2 became / has become
3 become (more likely than ‘get’ in a 
formal context)
4 become
5 get
6 get (more likely than ‘become’ in an 
informal context)
7 became
8 got
21.3
2 went dead
3 went red
4 get to know
5 get tired
6 came to like
7 go blind
8 went bust
21.4
1 go wrong
2 seemed to be awake
3 ✓
4 seemed to be taking
5 hadn’t got dressed
6 ✓ (‘be ill’ would also be possible)
7 went missing
8 to get worried
9 becoming obvious
10 ✓
UNIT 22
22. 1
2 She was offered a second-hand 
bicycle. / A second-hand bicycle was 
offered (to) her. 
3 Improvements have been proposed to 
the developers. 
4 Some interesting changes were 
suggested to me. 
5 He was awarded a prize. / A prize was 
awarded to him.
6 The President’s arrival will be 
announced to the waiting journalists. 
7 The password had been mentioned to 
the thieves.
8 I have been lent some skis. / Some skis 
have been lent to me.
9 I am being sent a lot of spam emails. / 
A lot of spam emails are being sent to 
me.
10 The changes are going to be explained 
to the students.
22.2
2 introduced; I was introduced to Mrs 
Rossi by Tony at his birthday party. (or 
… Mrs Rossi at Tony’s birthday party.)
3 seen; Has Chris been seen (by anyone) 
this morning?
4 (have) appointed; Sven Larsen has been 
appointed (or was appointed) Regional 
Sales Director for Scandinavia.
5 will demonstrate; I am certain that 
Sarah’s suitability as company director 
will be demonstrated to those who 
still have any doubt. 
6 declared ( or have declared); Alan 
Watson was declared (or has been 
declared) winner of the election after a 
recount.
22.3
2 The product was phased out (by the 
company) over a period of three years. 
3 No passive
4 Many people have been deprived of 
the right to vote (by the decision). 
5 No passive
6 No passive
7 The last two items were held over 
(by the chairperson) until the next 
committee meeting. 
8 Walkers were prevented from crossing 
the ﬁeld after it was fenced off (by the 
farmer).
UNIT 23
23. 1
2 denied being involved
3 was left holding 
4 remembered being bitten
5 avoided being taken
6 was observed hiding
7 was sent tumbling
8 faced being expelled
9 was found wandering
10 resented being given
23.2
2 Emil and Laura could be heard arguing 
next door.
3  Ollie hated being teased by the other 
children. 
4 The burglar was observed entering the 
museum through a window.
5 The pop concert is expected to attract 
over 20,000 people. 
6 She didn’t mind being criticised. 
7 I was required to complete two copies 
of the customs declaration.
8 Mrs Dee was caught shoplifting. 
23.3
2 Omar hopes to be selected by the 
team captain. (different meaning)
3 Kathy arranged to be taken to the 
station by Alastair. (different meaning)
4 Galdos has come to be recognised as 
one of Spain’s greatest novelists by 
critics. (corresponding meaning)
5 Holidaymakers continue to be 
attracted to the south coast. 
(corresponding meaning)
257
Key to Exercises
6 The Finance Minister has agreed to 
be interviewed by Harris. (different 
meaning)
UNIT 24
24.1 
2 The main stadium has been designed 
to accommodate many different 
sports. 
3 The temporary stands will be taken 
down after the Games. 
4 The basketball arena will have been 
completed by the end of May.
5 The rowing competition is being held 
on the River Nene.
6 The athletics track had been 
completed (or was completed) only a 
year after the city got the Olympics. 
7 The handball venue was being used as 
a warehouse until a year ago. 
8 The badminton arena should have 
been ﬁnished by now. 
24.2
2 The appointment of a new managing 
director will be made next week. 
3 Accusations of corruption in the local 
council have been made. / Accusations 
of corruption have been made against 
the local council. 
4 The demolition of the building was 
completed in only two days.
5 The presentation of the trophy will be 
made after the speeches.
6 Resistance from local residents to 
the proposed new industrial area will 
certainly be expected.
24.3
2 is (being) ruled (or more naturally ‘is 
now (being) ruled’)
3 are disappearing / have disappeared
4 fear
5 is estimated / has been estimated
6 will be turned into
7 is using / has used / has been using
8 to be abandoned
9 be affected
10 expect / are expecting
11 are (being) destroyed
UNIT 25
25. 1
1 agreed
2 proposed / shown
3 hoped / explained
4 decided
5 explained
6 established / revealed
7 intended
8 planned
9 assumed / thought
10 discovered 
25.2
2 ✗
3 It has been discovered that there is 
water on Mars. 
4 It is believed that terrorists are 
operating in Berlin.
5 It is expected that the moon 
astronauts will return (to Earth) today. 
6 It has been revealed that ex-President 
Julius is / was a spy.
7 ✗
8 It is said that the King is making a 
good recovery.
9 It has been established that a 
restaurant is / was the source of a food 
poisoning outbreak. 
10 ✗
25.3
2 It is not thought that the fault is 
serious. (or It is thought that the 
fault is not serious.) / The fault is not 
thought to be serious. 
3 It is expected that it will take several 
weeks to correct the fault. (or It is 
expected that the fault will take 
several weeks to correct.) / The fault 
is expected to take several weeks to 
correct. 
4 It has been decided to postpone the 
next rocket launch. 
5 It is suggested that the next launch 
should take place in May.
UNIT 26
26. 1
1 whom
2 Which
3 Which 
4 Which
5 Whom / Who (‘Whom’ is very formal)
6 Who
7 Which / Who 
8 Who
26.2
1 are
2 teaches (whether or not the expected 
answer is one person or two)
3 is
4 makes
5 are / is
6 has
26.3
2 What + d
3 What / How + b
4 How + h
5 What + j
6 How + a or g
7 How + e or i
8 What + f
9 What / How + c 
10 What + e or i
26.4
1 Whose
2 ✓
3 whose
 4 Who lives is more likely
5 Who’s
6 ✓ (or less formally Whose travels in 
Nepal did Liam Wilson write a book 
about?)
7 Which is more likely
8 Which is more likely
9 To whose address?
10 ✓ (What have is also possible) 
UNIT 27
27 . 1
Possible answers are given
2 Didn’t you get my email saying I’d be 
on holiday?
3 Couldn’t you get a babysitter?
4 But weren’t you supposed to do that 
last night?
5 Can’t you leave it outside?
6 Wouldn’t you rather go by plane? 
27 .2
2 Haven’t you any interest in maths at 
all? (or Don’t you have any interest in 
maths at all?) Have you no interest 
in maths at all? (or Do you have no 
interest in maths at all?) 
3 Couldn’t you ﬁnd anywhere else to 
sleep? Could you ﬁnd nowhere else to 
sleep? 
4 Can’t you remember anything about 
the accident? Can you remember 
nothing about the accident? 
5 Why don’t I ever do well in exams? 
Why do I never do well in exams?
6 Isn’t there anybody you can ask for 
help? Is there nobody you can ask for 
help?
27 .3
2 He’s leaving when? / He’s doing what? 
/ He’s what?
3 He’ll be away for how long? / He’ll 
what?
4 It’ll cost how much? / It’ll what?
5 He’s sold (his) what? / He’s done 
what? / He’s what?
6 He’s going climbing where? / He’s 
doing what? / He’s what?
27 .4
1  do you not  Why don’t you (C)
2   Who do you expect  that  will read 
your blog? (F)
3  ✓ (F)
4  Was not  Wasn’t (D)
5  ✓ (C)
6   What did you say  that  is in these 
biscuits? (F)
7  ✓ (F)
8  did not  didn’t (C)
258
Key to Exercises
UNIT 28
28. 1
2 answered (the phone) 
3 eat (dinner) 
4 thanked Val 
5 washed (herself)
6 brushed her hair 
7 changed (her clothes) 
8 put on some makeup
9 drove (her car) 
10 reached their house 
11 waved (her hand) 
12 parked (her car) 
13 cooking (dinner) 
14 to pick some ﬂowers 
15 studying (French) 
16 mention her 
17 introduce you
18 enjoyed the evening 
19 afford it
20 wash up (the dishes) 
21 invite Val and Tom 
28.2
2 … culminated in the discovery of 
penicillin. 
3 … differentiate between fantasy and 
reality. 
4 … specialises in seafood. 
5 … inﬂicted a surprise defeat on …
6 … attributed his success to …
7 … mistook the black car for …
8 … based her new novel on …
28.3
Example adjectives are given
2 satisﬁed; She declared herself to be 
satisﬁed with the result. / She declared 
that she was / is satisﬁed with the 
result. 
3 inedible; They considered the food to 
be inedible. / They considered that the 
food was / is inedible. 
4 reliable; I have always found him to be 
reliable. / I have always found that he 
was / is reliable.
5 happy; We believed her to be happy at 
school. / We believed that she was / is 
happy at school.
UNIT 29
29. 1
In some cases other tenses are possible
2 I have to choose his clothes for him. 
3 Can you take this present for / to her?
4 … pass it to me … 
5 … we sold all the carpets to him as 
well. (‘… we offered all the carpets to 
him …’ is also possible)
6 He teaches sports to disabled children. 
7 Can you read these instructions to / for 
me, please?
8 Jane posted the letter for me … 
(‘Jane took the letter for me …’is also 
possible)
9 I offered my old bike to him … 
10 Can you save some dinner for me, 
please?
29.2
1 He kindly collected some library books 
for me. 
2 He admitted his error to his 
colleagues.
3 ✓
4 Can I ask you a favour? 
5 A special ticket allows (people) entry 
to all the museums in the city. 
6 ✓
29.3
2 his sister to me; me her photograph / 
her photograph to me 
3 the problem to our teacher; us another 
half hour 
4 him a paper aeroplane / a paper 
aeroplane for him; his broken car for 
him; him three bedtime stories / three 
bedtime stories to (or for) him 
5 you a fortune; me the money / the 
money to me
6 Ben a drink / a drink for Ben; the glass 
to him / him the glass
UNIT 30
30. 1
2 We don’t approve of the developer’s 
locating the factory so close to houses.
3 ✗
4 ✗ (not a verb of [dis]liking or thinking)
5 It is difﬁcult to imagine his accepting 
the decision without any objection. 
6 No one in the crowd that day will 
forget Ashe’s ﬁghting so hard to win 
the match. 
7 I remember their arguing a great deal 
when they were children.
8 ✗ (not a verb of [dis]liking or thinking)
30.2
2 approve of children wearing
3 end by summarising
4 discouraged me from going
5 rely on Sophie turning up
6 adapt to living / adapt to dealing with 
life
30.3 
1 burst (a single, short event)
2 watching (the context suggests that 
Carl was being watched before he saw 
the watcher; in other words, he didn’t 
see the whole of the event)
3 sting (‘stinging’ is also possible, but 
this would suggest that the wasp stung 
several times)
4 feeding (this refers to a repeated 
event)
30.4
2 + e   The new course is intended to help 
people (to) understand modern art.
3 + a   Scientists hope the new drug will 
help (them) (to) prevent hay fever.
4 + f   We didn’t agree with the decision, 
but we didn’t dare (to) protest against 
it.
5 + d   When Ethan arrives, have him wait 
outside my ofﬁce.
6 + c   The dial on the left lets you control 
the speed of the fan.  
UNIT 31
31.1
1 a told b threatened
2 a offered b allowed
3 a managed b persuaded
4 a encouraged b agreed
5 a reminded b pretended
6 a hoped b advised
31.2
a
When I advertised for a website designer 
for the business, Greta got the job. But 
I’ve now learnt that you can’t rely on 
Greta to do anything. I waited ages for 
her to come up with some initial ideas for 
the site, and then I had to keep on at her 
to do any more work on it. Finally, she 
said she couldn’t do it after all.
b
Managers of the National Electricity 
Company have appealed to workers to 
end their strike, and have called on the 
government to intervene in the dispute. 
The Energy Minister said that he has 
arranged for employers and employees 
to meet next week, and he prevailed 
on strikers to return to work in the 
meantime.
31.3
1 agreed not to tell
2 are / were thought to have escaped 
3 don’t recall seeing / don’t recall having 
seen (similar meanings)
4 denies / denied having received or 
denies / denied receiving (similar 
meanings)
5 asked not to be named
6 didn’t feel like walking
7 seems to have disappeared
8  are / were believed to have arrived
UNIT 32
32.1
The most likely reporting verbs are given in 
the answers, but others are possible.
2 ‘Why don’t we stop for a coffee?’ she 
suggested.
3 ‘All right, Georgia, it was me,’ he 
confessed. 
259
Key to Exercises
4 ‘My novel is more exciting than a Dan 
Brown thriller,’ she boasted.
5 ‘I always carry two umbrellas with 
me because I’m always losing them,’ 
explained Lena. / … Lena explained.
6 ‘Oh, no, it’s raining again,’ grumbled 
Matt. / … Matt grumbled.
7 ‘Good morning, Miss Novak,’ chorused 
the children. / … the children chorused.
8 ‘Have I done the right thing?’ I 
wondered.
32.2
2 threatened not to repay
3 didn’t feel – could ( more likely than He 
felt that he couldn’t ask his parents to 
help him again.)
4 insisted – wasn’t ( or hadn’t been)
5 announced – wasn’t going
6 didn’t expect – to be ( more likely than 
He expected his mother not to be 
angry.)
7 didn’t think – would ( more likely than 
She thought Adam wouldn’t mind 
waiting.)
8 promised – wouldn’t
32.3
1 ‘how I heard about the job’ is also 
possible
2 what my long-term career plans were / 
what were my long-term career plans
3 how many languages I spoke / speak
4 where I (had) learnt / learned Chinese
5 if / whether I could use a spreadsheet
6 if / whether I had organised 
international conferences before. 
7 if / whether I would be willing to live 
overseas for periods of time
8 when I can / could start work
UNIT 33
33. 1
1 advised
2 assured / promised
3 warned
4 inform / teach
5 have shown 
6 has reassured / has advised
7 promised
33.2
2 ✗
3 The judge thought his explanation to 
be unconvincing. 
4 I expected her plans to fail.
5 ✗
6 Lucas acknowledged his chances of 
winning the race to be slim. 
7 We found the rugby supporters to be 
very well behaved. 
8 ✗
33.3
Likely answers are given
1 complained to
2 complained to; mentioned to; 
announced to
3 joked with; announced to; mentioned 
to
4 announced to 
5 requires of 
6 disagreed with
7 mention to
33.4
Possible necessary objects are given in bold
1 has warned that they 
2 explained to employees that 
3 confessed to her audience that 
4 denied that management 
5 replied that an announcement 
6 reassured employees / them that 
7 went on to complain that government 
help 
8 demanded of ministers that 
(‘demanded that ministers provide’ 
would also be possible and less formal)
9 asked of staff that (‘asked staff to 
continue’ would also be possible and 
less formal)
10 reassured staff / them that
Note that alternatives without‘ that’ 
(1 has warned they, 2 explained to 
employees, etc.) are grammatical, but less 
likely in a formal written context.
UNIT 34
34. 1 
Added objects are in bold
2 + j   He took my hands and showed 
me how / where to hold the golf club 
properly.
3 + g   I explained carefully so that the 
students understood what they had to 
do in the test.
4 + i   Anna was new in the ofﬁce and 
I had to keep reminding her who 
everyone was.
5 + b   I saw Sarah leave the building, but 
I didn’t notice where she went after 
that.
6 + e   When I saw Hugo alone at the 
party I wondered why Helen wasn’t 
with him.
7 + h   As we walked over the hills the 
guide warned us where / when the 
path was dangerous.
8 + a   After I’d dismantled the motor I 
couldn’t remember how to ﬁt the parts 
back together.
9 + f   To win a prize you had to guess how 
many sweets were in the jar.
10 + c   As the guests came in Diego told 
them where to put their coats.
34.2
1 debating
2 discuss
3 considering
4 choose
5 decide
34.3
The villagers warned me what the 
conditions were like at higher altitudes, 
and advised me to take enough food 
for a week. There was some discussion 
through the day as to whether the snow 
would arrive before my descent from the 
mountain, but I never imagined how hard 
the conditions would be. In the morning 
they showed me (the way / how: one of 
these must be deleted) to get to the track 
up the mountain.   
When the snow started falling it was very 
light, and I couldn’t decide  if  whether to 
carry on or go back down. Soon, however, 
I couldn’t see where to go. 
I wondered  if  whether to retrace my 
steps and try to ﬁnd the track again, but 
by the time I decided  whether  that I 
should go back, the track had disappeared. 
As the snow got heavier I began to realise  
whether  that my life was in danger. 
Fortunately, my years in the Andes 
had taught me what to do in extreme 
conditions. I knew that there was a 
shepherd’s hut somewhere on this side of 
the mountain that I could shelter in, but I 
didn’t know  that  whether it was nearby 
or miles away.
UNIT 35
35. 1
2 She alleged that Markus had stolen / 
stole jewellery from her house. 
3 She estimated that the vase was (‘is’ is 
also possible) around 250 years old. 
4 She repeated that she had already seen 
the ﬁlm. 
5 She conceded that perhaps she treated 
/ had treated Lara unkindly.
6 She recalled that Wilma’s great-
grandmother was / had been from 
Spain.
35.2
1 have solved
2 states
3 has 
4 understand
5 looks
6 is / was 
35.3
1 When I mentioned to Nokes that he 
had been seen ✓ (or was seen) in a 
local shop last Monday, he protested 
that he  is  was at home all day. He 
swears that he  didn’t own  doesn’t 
own a blue Ford Focus. He claimed 
that he had been ✓ (or went) to the 
paint factory two weeks ago to look 
for work. Nokes alleges that he is 
✓ a good friend of Jamie Barnes. He 
260
Key to Exercises
insisted that he didn’t telephone ✓ 
(or hadn’t telephoned) Barnes last 
Monday morning. When I pointed out 
to Nokes that a large quantity of paint 
had been found ✓ (or was found) in 
his house, he replied that he  is storing  
had been storing (or was storing) it 
for a friend. 
2 At the beginning of the interview I 
reminded Barnes that he is ✓ (or was) 
entitled to have a lawyer present. He 
denied that he knew ✓ (or knows) 
anyone by the name of Daniel Nokes. 
Barnes conﬁrmed that he  is  had 
been (or was) in the area of the paint 
factory last Monday, but said that he  
 is  visiting  was visiting (or had been 
visiting) his mother. He admitted that 
he  is walking  was walking (or had 
been walking) along New Street at 
around ten. He maintains that he  was  
is a very honest person and would 
never be involved in anything illegal. 
UNIT 36
36. 1 
The most likely answers are given. Possible 
objects are given in bold.
2 He agreed to collect Declan from 
school. 
3 He ordered us to be quiet. 
4 He urged me to stay for a few more 
days. 
5 He vowed to ﬁght the ban on smoking 
in public places. 
6 He expected / hoped to see Olivia at 
the party. 
7 He asked me to lend him ten pounds. 
(or He asked to borrow ten pounds.)
8 He called on the government to do 
more to help the homeless.
9 He hoped / expected to avoid the 
heavy trafﬁc (by leaving early).
36.2
1  suggested  promised
2  ✓
3  intended  said / promised 
4  insisted  expected
5  demanded  ordered
6  wanted  hoped
7  ✓
8  offered  proposed / ordered  
36.3
Example answers
2 … reducing bus and train fares. 
3 … seeing it. 
4 … buying a guide book.
5 … going to the doctor.
6 … building it to the east of the city.
7 … doing more exercise.
8 … going for a long walk. 
The verb ‘propose’ can be followed by a 
to-inﬁnitive without an object (see A). 
For example: 
2 To encourage people to use public 
transport the council proposed to 
reduce bus and train fares.
6 The city urgently needs a new airport, 
and the government proposes to build 
it to the east of the city.
UNIT 37
37 . 1
1 will 
2 may / might 
3 can 
4 would 
5 couldn’t
6 can / could
7 will / would
37 .2
2 She promised that she wouldn’t be 
late …
3 He suggested that we could go to Paris 
for the weekend …
4 She guaranteed that she could get me 
there in good time …
5 He insisted that he would pay for the 
meal …
Sentences 2 and 4 have alternatives with 
a to-inﬁnitive clause:
2 She promised not to be late…
4 She guaranteed to get us there in good 
time…
37 .3
2 (that) she would be there this time. 
3 had to be in the city centre by one 
(‘must be’ is also possible, but less 
natural)
4 asked where we should meet
5 mustn’t forget to bring my student 
discount card
37 .4
2 She said that I could / can travel with 
them. 
3 She said that she wouldn’t answer his 
questions. 
4 She said that Karl would / should / 
ought to be back soon. 
5 She said that she may / might / could 
have to move to Milan. 
6 She said that she couldn’t / wouldn’t 
accept that Jason is / was dishonest. 
7 She said that Maria would / will be 
disappointed if we leave / left without 
seeing her. 
UNIT 38
38. 1
2 He failed to address the question / 
issue of who would / should pay for 
the repairs to the building. 
3 I was delighted to get an invitation 
to spend the holidays with them in 
Scotland. 
4 I think it was Aristotle who made the 
observation that there’s no such thing 
as bad publicity. 
5 Amazingly the police accepted Rudi’s 
explanation that he had taken the 
wallet by mistake. 
6 On the webinar they debated the issue 
/ question of whether assisted suicide 
should be a criminal offence. 
7 The letter from the company gave a 
ﬁnal warning that I should pay the bill 
by the end of the week. / … to pay the 
bill by the end of the week.
8 The government has broken its 
promise to reduce the rate of income 
tax. / … that it would reduce the rate 
of income tax. 
9 The positive reaction to my work gave 
me considerable encouragement to 
take up photography as a career. 
10 Waiting passengers were angry when 
they heard the announcement that the 
ﬂight was cancelled. (or … had been 
cancelled).
38.2
2 There has been a great deal of 
argument as to how to deﬁne poverty.
3 There have been months of 
speculation as to whether President 
Malik would stand again. 
4 Scientists might come to a / some 
conclusion as to what their results 
imply. 
5 There is still no deﬁnite explanation as 
to why the dinosaurs disappeared. 
38.3
1 unsure whether or not certain whether 
are also possible
2 dismissive of 
3 adamant that
4 unsure how / not certain how 
5 angry that / apologetic that
6 apologetic about
7 not certain when / unsure when
8 abusive to / towards
9 complimentary about 
10 agreed that / adamant that
UNIT 39
39. 1
The most likely answers are given
2 Lee urged that Mara Bianchi should be 
promoted to export manager.
3 Alice recommended that a sales 
representative should be sent to South 
Africa.
4 Alice reported that the Delaware 
Bridge project should be completed by 
August next year.
5 Simon insisted that work schedules 
should be kept to.
6 Simon instructed that all monthly 
reports should be sent to him directly.
261
Key to Exercises
7 Alina suggested that web conferencing 
should be used for meetings to save 
money on air fares.  
8 Alina declared that the company’s 
head ofﬁce should remain in London. 
9 Nathan agreed that the company 
should sponsor the European chess 
league for the next three years.
10 Nathan announced that in future all 
claims for travel expenses should be 
made in US dollars.
39.2
2 Yes
3 Yes
4 No
5 Yes
6 Yes
7 Yes
8 No
9 No
10 No
39.3
Possible adjectives are given in these 
answers
2 I am shocked that Kristina should 
behave so badly. 
3 I am astounded that anyone should 
vote for him. 
4 It is urgent that he should return home 
immediately. 
5 I am amused that he should take his 
appearance so seriously. 
6 I am upset that they should think I had 
cheated them. 
7 It is appalling that they should be 
allowed to go free. 
8 It is imperative that we should act now 
to avoid war. 
UNIT 40
40. 1
2  is  are
3  remain  remains
4  ✓
5  is  are
6  let  lets
7  ✓
8  are  is
9  are  is
10  have  has
11  ✓
12  is  are
13  add  adds
40.2
2 university refuse / refuses
3 audience … is (A singular verb form 
is more likely here as the focus is on 
the audience as a whole rather than 
individual members.)
4 orchestra perform / performs
5 jury includes (A singular verb form is 
used here as ‘include’ focuses on the 
group as a whole rather than individual 
members.)
6 class have (A plural verb form is used 
as this is something the individuals did, 
emphasised by the use of ‘all’.)
7 press presents / present
8 The United Nations has / have
40.3
1  come  comes 
2  ✓
3  report  reports 
4  are  is 
5 ✓
6 ✓
7  have  has
8  are  is
9   ✓ (‘… need to be kept …’ is also 
possible)
10  are  is
UNIT 41
41. 1
1 
b his early paintings remains / remain
c the food tastes
d Dr Jones’s acquaintances knows
2 
a vegetarians is expected 
b medicines relieve 
c  victims … exceeds
d museums in the capital charge
3
a the pieces lasts / last
b player tries 
c the cars are / is tested
d these factors inﬂuence/inﬂuences
41.2
1 are; wants
2 think – has (more likely than ‘have’ in 
this formal context)
3 has / have; has
4 claim; constitutes (more likely than 
‘constitute’ as ‘the wreck of the ship 
and its cargo’ constitute together, as a 
single item, a danger)
5 is / are (we use ‘is’ if we think of 
‘sausages and chips’ as a single item); 
have; are / ’s
UNIT 42
42. 1
1 ✓ (‘are’ is also possible)
2 ✓
3 have
4 ✓ (‘were’ is also possible)
5 go
6 are
7 ✓ (‘has’ is also possible)
8 are
9 say
42.2
1 (singular) is
2 (plural) are
3 (singular) is
4 (singular) has
5 (singular) is
6 (plural) provide / offer
42.3
1 have; have; shop / shops 
2 is (‘are’ is also possible, but less likely); 
expect / expects 
3 is; blames / blame
4 was (‘were’ is also possible, but less 
likely); has / have 
5 admit / admits; were; was - is
6 were; have 
7 shows; is; believe 
8 have; says / say; are
UNIT 43
43. 1
1 a ✓
 b a computer programmer
 c a ﬁlm star
2 a ✓
 b girls’ school
 c the car door
 d a cut on the / her head
3 a ✓
 b ✓
 c a bottle of milk
 d a packet of biscuits
 e some toothpaste
 f ✓
4 a ✓
 b  songs about pollution (‘pollution 
songs’ is not a well-known class of 
songs)
5 a tool shed
 b spiders’ webs
6 a armchair
 b ✓
 c the 500-piece jigsaw puzzle
 d glasses case 
43.2
1 cover up
2 broken out 
3 stopping over 
4 get together 
5 stopover (related to 3) 
6 get-together (4) 
7 cover-up (1) 
8 outbreak (2)
43.3
2 middle-of-the-road
3 round-the-clock
4 step-by-step
5 once-in-a-lifetime
6 down-to-earth
7 man / woman-in-the-street ( an 
alternative is ‘man or woman in the 
street’, usually without hyphens)
8 larger-than-life
262
Key to Exercises
UNIT 44
44. 1
1 an
2 a
3 an
4 a
5 a (‘MiG’ is said / mɪg/)
6 an
7 an
8 a
9 an
10 a
11 a
12 an
13 an
14 a
44.2
1  one  a
2  ✓
3  a  one
4  one  an
5  ✓
6  one  a
7   one  a (‘one’ would imply ‘one and no 
more’; ‘a’ is more likely if this is a more 
general invitation to ‘have some cake’)
8  ✓ (‘one’ implies ‘one and only one’)
9 ✓ (both ‘one’ and ‘a’ are possible)
10  one  a
11   one  a (‘one’ would emphasise the 
number and seems less likely than ‘a’ 
in this context)
12  ✓ (both ‘one’ and ‘a’ are possible)
13  a  one
14  one  a
15  a  one
16  ✓ (both ‘one’ and ‘a’ are possible)
44.3
1 one / a
2 one
3 one
4 one / an
5 a
6 one
7 one / a 
8 an 
9 one 
10 one
11 one / a 
12 A
UNIT 45
45. 1
1 a the world b a world
2 a a bright future b the future
3 a the past b a past
4 a a deserted beach 
 b  the beach (‘a beach’ is also possible 
here, meaning a particular but 
unspeciﬁed beach)
45.2
1 a customer 
2 the individual / an individual (similar 
meaning) 
3 the car 
4 The television 
5 the smoker 
45.3
2 pleasure
3 a sound
4 grammar
5 iron
6 Sound
7 a real pleasure
8 a grammar
9 an iron
10 conversation
UNIT 46
46. 1
1  an author
2  the  a / – minister
3  a Mac
4  Not the George Clooney
5  a Van Gogh
6  ✓
7  the Nielsens
8  the  a / – Usain Bolt
46.2
1 a / the / – (‘a’ suggests that there are a 
number of marketing advisers; ‘the’ or 
‘–’ indicate that there is only one)
2 the / –
3 the / – 
4 the / – (in journalism)
5 – 
6 – ; –
7 – 
8 A / –
46.3
1 the
2 (the)
3 (the)
4 the
5 (the)
6 (the)
7 the
8 the
46.4
1 this / a
2 –
3 – (‘this’ would be unlikely here as the 
paint is not the topic of what comes 
next)
4 the / –
5 a / –
6 a
7 the
8 a / this (‘this’ introduces the woman as 
the focus of the next part of the story)
9 the / –
10 the / –
UNIT 47
47 . 1
1 a  Children (a general reference; 
speciﬁc children are not referred to)
 b  the children (a speciﬁc reference, 
probably to my/our children)
2 a  the agriculture (a reference to the 
agriculture in a speciﬁc area)
 b agriculture (a general reference)
3 a  islands (reference to islands 
generally)
 b  The islands (reference to a speciﬁc 
group of islands)
4 a  the holidays (speciﬁc reference; the 
holidays that are coming soon)
 b  Holidays (a general reference to 
holidays in this part of the world)
5 a rain (a general reference)
 b  the rain (reference to a speciﬁc, 
understood period of rain)
6 a  the money (reference to a speciﬁc, 
understood sum of money)
 b  money (an observation on the 
effect of money generally)
7 a Parents (= a general reference)
 b  The parents (a speciﬁc reference to 
particular parents)
8 a  the ﬁre (reference to a speciﬁc ﬁre)
 b ﬁre (a general reference)
47 .2
1 – (‘all afternoon’ is more likely than ‘all 
the afternoon’)
2 a
3 the 
4 the
5 the
6 – 
7 the
8 –
9 the / – (‘the winter’ might imply 
‘the coming winter’. However, both 
‘winter’ and ‘the winter’ might be a 
generalisation meaning ‘any winter’)
10 a
47 .3
1 an email
2 by car / by air
3 the air
4 the post / an email
5 by post / by email
6 the car
7 by email
8 by air
UNIT 48
48. 1
1  some books
2  some 
3  some 
4  ✓
5  Some sports
6  ✓
7  some 
8  Some children
48.2
Suggested answers are given
2 Some 30% of all city buses have been 
found to be unsafe.
3 An unexploded bomb has been found 
some ﬁve miles from the centre of 
Newham.
4 Some 25% of electricity will come 
from wind energy by 2025.
5 Some 200 jobs are to be lost at the 
Encon steelworks.
263
Key to Exercises
48.3
Suggested answers are given
2 He’s probably out with some girlfriend 
or other. 
3 Maybe I lent it to some student in my 
geography class.
4 I think it’s in some travel agent’s in the 
High Street. 
5 Perhaps she’s got to ﬁnish some report 
or other.
48.4
1 any
2 any / some (‘any’ suggests that I could 
eat none of the food; ‘some’ implies 
that I was able to eat some but not all 
of it)
3 anything
4 someone (‘positive’ meaning)
5 anything / something (‘anything’ 
suggests that he said that he did 
nothing at all wrong; ‘something’ 
suggests that he has been accused of a 
particular wrongdoing but denied this)
6 anyone 
7 any
8 any
9 Some (= not all)
10 anyone / someone (‘anyone’ suggests 
that I don’t want to lend it to any 
person; ‘someone’ suggests that I 
may have a particular person in mind 
(perhaps they have asked me to lend it 
to them))
UNIT 49
49. 1
2 … no one heard … 
3 Not a drop … 
4 … no point …
5 … nowhere else … 
6 … none of the hotels …
7 … never going to get … 
8 … nothing wrong …
49.2
1 There aren’t any in the cupboard.
4 … there wasn’t any point in protesting.
5 … he didn’t have anywhere else to go. 
7 Isn’t he ever going to get a job? ( or Is 
he ever going to get a job?)
8 … they couldn’t ﬁnd anything wrong 
with her.
49.3
1 are no jobs
2 are no trains or buses
3 no seatbelts
4 was no spare tyre
5 ✓
6 ✓
7 are no trees
8 was no swimming pool
9 was no television
10 ✓
11 was no reply
12 ✓
13 was no choice
49.4
Possible answers
2 Mr Carlson didn’t want to sell the 
painting, and no amount of money / 
persuading could make him change his 
mind.
3 I sent job applications to over a 
hundred companies, but not one of 
them invited me for an interview. 
4 Smallpox used to be common all over 
the world but since 1978 not one case 
of the disease has been recorded.
5 The ﬂoor had dirty black marks all over 
it, and no amount of polishing could 
get it clean.
49.5
1 No problem. / No bother. 
2 No wonder. 
3 No chance. / No way.
4 No idea. 
5 No comment. 
UNIT 50
50. 1 
Suggested corrections/improvements are 
given
1 Lola’s had  many  a lot of (more usual 
than ‘many’ in conversation) problems 
with her back for  a lot  
 of  many years. She’s having an 
operation next week and she won’t 
be back at work for  a good deal of  a 
good many weeks afterwards. 
2 A: There’s bound to be  much  a lot 
of / lots of trafﬁc on the way to the 
station. Perhaps we should leave now. 
B: No, there’s plenty of time left, and 
at this time of day  many  a lot of / 
lots of people will already be at work.
3  Many  A lot of / Lots of (more usual 
than ‘many’ in conversation) people 
think that hedgehogs are very rare 
nowadays, but when I was in Wales I 
saw  many  a lot / lots (more usual 
than ‘many’ in conversation). 
4  A lot  Many have claimed that 
Professor Dowman’s study on current 
attitudes to politics is ﬂawed. One 
criticism is that  much  far too many 
people questioned in the survey were 
under 18.
5  A lot of  Much research has been 
conducted on the effects of diet on 
health, with  a lot of  many studies 
focusing on the link between fat intake 
and heart disease. However,  
 a lot  much remains to be done. 
(‘much’ and ‘many’ are preferred in a 
written academic context).
6 While it is true that  a lot of  many 
thousands of jobs were lost with the 
decline of the northern coal and steel 
industries,  a lot of  many advantages 
have also followed.  Much  Far too 
many cases of lung disease were 
recorded in the region, but with lower 
levels of pollution the number has 
declined. In addition, a  great deal of  a 
great many hi-tech companies have 
moved in to take advantage of the 
newly available workforce.
50.2
2 many a sunny afternoon 
3 Many a ship 
4 its / the many golf courses 
5 my many emails
6 his many expeditions (‘many an 
expedition’ is also possible)
7 Many a teacher 
8 the many coffee shops
50.3
1 plenty of (‘a lot of’ is also possible)
2 A lot of (not ‘plenty of’)
3 a lot of (not ‘plenty of’)
4 a lot of (not ‘plenty of’)
5 plenty of (‘a lot of’ is also possible)
UNIT 51
51. 1
1 were all 
2 can all 
3 had all
4 are all 
5 All the children or The children all 
(both are possible)
6 all been
51.2
1 The whole process 
2 Whole areas of the country
3 The whole trip
4 all of the towns
5 all of the pages
6 all the building / the whole building 
(‘all the building’ suggests that we see 
the building as being made up of parts 
(a number of rooms, for example); ‘the 
whole building’ would be more likely in 
a formal context)
7 The whole room
51.3
1 every
2 each
3 every
4 each / every
5 each
6 every
7 each / every 
8 each
9 Every / Each
10 every 
(In 4, 7 , and 9 ‘each’ emphasises that 
we are thinking of the places / children / 
households separately; ‘every’ suggests 
something like ‘all of’.)
264
Key to Exercises
51.4
1 Every so often 
2 ✓
3 every few weeks
4 ✓ (‘all Friday’ is possible in an informal 
context; ‘the whole of Friday’ would 
also be possible here)
5 each of them
6 not all the food usually gets eaten
7 Not all of my brothers always come
8 Neil and his family were all on holiday 
9 the rest of us all had a great time 
10 ✓ (‘all evening’ would also be possible)
UNIT 52
52. 1
1 few (‘a few’ would mean that a small 
number of people would disagree. It 
would be more likely after ‘but …’ than 
‘and …’)
2 Little 
3 few
4 the few / a few
5 A little
6 The few / What few
7 a little 
8 a few
9 a few
10 the little / what little
52.2
Most likely changes are given
1 ‘… a bit of TV …’ (more likely in this 
informal context)
2 … there are only a few left or… there 
aren’t many left.
3 … there isn’t much more … or… 
there’s not much more …
4 … not many like that … or … only a 
few like that …
5 … has had few female politicians …
6 … exchanged few words …
7 … a little more conﬁdent …
8 There seems to be little prospect …
52.3
Possible answers
1 Fewer students had a part-time job 
in 2000 than now. (‘Less students …’ 
would also be acceptable for some 
people) Less (or Fewer) than 10% of 
female students had a part-time job in 
2000.
2 Male students spend less money than 
female students on books. Students 
spend less on books now than they did 
in 2000.
3 Less (or Fewer) than 10% of female 
students walk to lectures now. 
 Fewer students walk to lectures now 
than in 1980. (‘Less students …’ would 
also be acceptable for some people)
4 Male students spend less time online 
now than female students. 
Surprising results might be:
Female students now spend no less than 
20% of their income on books. 
Female students spend no less than 24 
hours a week online.
UNIT 53
53. 1
The relative pronoun can be omitted in 1, 
3, 4, 7 and 10.
53.2
1 (‘that’ or ‘–’ are more likely in an 
informal context)
2 Eva’s father, who is over 80, has just 
come back from a skiing holiday. 
3 The problems faced by the company, 
which I’ll look at in detail in a moment, 
are being resolved. (some people 
would use ‘that’ as an alternative) 
4 She was greatly inﬂuenced by her 
father, who / whom she adored. 
(‘whom’ is formal) 
5 He pointed to the stairs which / that 
led down to the cellar.
6 These drugs, which are used to treat 
stomach ulcers, have been withdrawn 
from sale. (some people would use 
‘that’ as an alternative) 
7 The singer, who was recovering from 
ﬂu, had to cancel her concert. 
8 The minister talked about the plans 
for tax reform that / which / – he will 
reveal next month. (‘which’ is more 
likely in a formal context)
9 I have two older sisters whom / who 
/ that / – I love very much. (‘whom’ is 
very formal)
53.3
1 ‘which’ is possible, but less likely than 
‘that’ or ‘–’ 
2 ‘whom’ seems rather formal here and 
less likely than ‘who’, ‘that’, or ‘–’
3 ✓ ‘that I can’ is also possible 
4 … much that can … 
5  whom  who
6  which  ‘that’ or ‘–’ 
7 The boy who took …
8 ‘which’ is possible, but less likely than 
‘that’ or ‘–’
9 ‘which’ is possible, but less likely than 
‘that’ 
10 ‘which’ is possible, but less likely than 
‘that’ or ‘–’
UNIT 54
54. 1
2 + a   The newspaper is owned by the 
Mears group, whose chairperson is 
Miss Jiu Kim.
3 + f   Parents whose children are between 
four and six are being asked to take 
part in the survey. 
4 + b   Children whose diets contain 
high levels of protein do better in 
examinations. 
5 + e   My aunt, whose ﬁrst job was ﬁlling 
shelves in a supermarket, is now CEO 
of a department store. 
6 + c   I enjoy growing plants whose 
ﬂowers are attractive to bees. 
54.2
Example answers
2 A widow is a woman whose husband 
has died and who has not remarried. 
3 An actuary is a person whose job 
is to decide how much insurance 
companies should charge their 
customers. 
4 A furnace is a container in which things 
are melted or burnt. 
5 A gazebo is a small garden building in 
which people can sit to enjoy the view. 
6 Polo is a sport in which horse riders 
hit a ball using hammers with long 
handles.
54.3
1 the moment when
2 an agreement whereby
3 the area where
4 the reason why
5 a method whereby
6 a condition where 
54.4
1  whatever  whoever
2  that  what 
3  ✓
4  which  whatever (or ‘what’) 
5  whichever  whatever
6   ✓ (or ‘no relative pronoun’ or ‘which’)
7  what  that 
8  which  whichever / whatever
UNIT 55
55. 1
2 He was the uncle of Anne Boleyn, 
after whose execution in 1536 he lost 
power.
3 It is her unmarried name by which she 
is better known. 
4 Mr Wang, across whose land the road 
will be built, is very unhappy about the 
plans. 
5 The election result, about which 
there can be no doubt, is a great 
disappointment.
6 The building from which Marcus 
emerged was little more than a ruin. 
7 It is a medieval palace, in whose tower 
the king hid during the civil war. 
8 I am grateful to Aarav Basu, from 
whose book on the history of the 
bicycle this information comes.
265
Key to Exercises
55.2
2 Until 1914 the pound sterling was the 
currency in / with which most world 
trade was conducted.
3 They have changed the date on / by 
which the furniture is to be delivered.
4 Pasteurisation was discovered by the 
French chemist Louis Pasteur, after 
whom it was named. 
5 He was persuaded to stay in England 
by Charles Dickens, to whom he had 
shown his novel.
6 There are a number of safety 
procedures of which you should be 
aware.
7 Details are in the instruction manual 
with which the printer was supplied. 
8 Ms Park was left the money by her 
former husband, from whom she was 
divorced in 2005.
55.3
2 Until 1914 the pound sterling was 
the currency which / that most world 
trade was conducted in.
3 They have changed the date which / 
that / – the furniture is to be delivered 
on / by.
4 Pasteurisation was discovered by the 
French chemist Louis Pasteur, who it 
was named after.
5 He was persuaded to stay in England 
by Charles Dickens, who he had shown 
his novel to.
6 There are number of safety procedures 
which / that / – you should be aware 
of.
7 Details are in the instruction manual 
which / that / – the printer was 
supplied with.
8 Ms Park was left the money by her 
former husband, who she was divorced 
from in 2005.
55.4
1 The house which the thieves broke into 
…
2 ✓
3 … ﬁrst of which …
4 The party, which I’ve been looking 
forward to all week … 
5 ✓
6 … both of which …
7 … part of which …
8 … all of whom …
UNIT 56
56. 1
The most likely answers are given
2 I went on an IT training course with my 
colleague Mateo. 
3 Rubella, or German measles, is still a 
common childhood disease in many 
countries.
4 Four kilos of Beluga caviar, among the 
most expensive foods in the world, has 
been ordered for the reception. 
5 One of the most popular modern 
writers for children is the Australian 
John Marsden. 
6 Tonya’s father, and (her) trainer for 
the last ten years, was in the crowd to 
watch her victory.
7 Dr Soﬁa Lopez, head of Downlands 
Hospital, has criticised government 
plans to cut health funding. 
8 Klaus Schmidt, the German 10,000 
metres record holder and current 
European champion, is running in 
the Stockholm Marathon. (or Klaus 
Schmidt, the current European 
champion and (the) German 10,000 
metres record holder, …) 
56.2
2 + d   The two countries having land 
borders with the USA, namely / that is 
Mexico and Canada, have complained 
to the President about the new 
customs regulations. 
3 + a   The three most popular pets in 
Britain, namely / that is cats, dogs 
and rabbits, are found in 25% of 
households. 
4 + f   The capital of Estonia, namely / 
that is Tallinn, is situated on the Gulf 
of Finland. 
5 + b   The largest island in the world, 
namely / that is Greenland, covers over 
2 million square kilometres. 
6 + c   The ‘consumers’ of education, 
namely / that is students, should 
have ways of complaining about poor 
teaching.
56.3
2 educated; I went to a reunion for 
students who were educated in the 
physics department during the 1990s. 
3 being told off; As my aunt told 
me what she thought, I felt like a 
schoolboy who was being told off by 
his headteacher. 
4 saying; There is a sign on the gate 
which says ‘Entry forbidden’.
5 introduced; Across the river were some 
of the deer which were introduced into 
the park in the 19th century.
6 ﬂowing; Rivers which ﬂow into the 
Baltic Sea are much cleaner now than 
ten years ago. 
7 being printed; The booklets which are 
being printed as we speak will be on 
sale later this afternoon. 
8 needing; Anyone who needs further 
information can see me in my ofﬁce. 
UNIT 57
57 . 1
The most likely answers are given
2 + e   She’s in the photograph on the 
piano. 
3 + b   I plan to cut down the tree in the 
back garden
4 + a   There’s a team of people in green 
shirts. 
5 + d   We took the footpath by / along 
the canal. 
6 + i   The children can’t get over the fence 
around the pool.
7 + g   Go along the lane between the 
houses. 
8 + j   Nico’s a boy with a quick temper. 
9 + f   Follow the main road from Paris to 
Lyons. 
10 + h   She’s a teacher from New 
Zealand. 
57 .2
2 She’s in the photograph which is on 
the piano.
3 I plan to cut down the tree which is in 
the back garden. 
4 There’s a team of people who have / 
are wearing green shirts. 
5 We took the footpath which runs / 
goes by / along the canal. 
6 The children can’t get over the fence 
which is around the pool.
7 Go along the lane which runs between 
the houses.
8 Nico’s a boy who has a quick temper. 
9 Follow the main road which runs / 
goes from Paris to Lyons.
10 She’s a teacher who is / comes from 
New Zealand.
57 .3
Possible answers are given with some 
alternatives
2 Teachers (who work / working) at 
Queen’s College in the city centre, 
who went on strike last week, have 
appointed Kristina Borg, the head of 
English, as their spokesperson.
3 Marge Scott, who has died aged 95, 
was the ﬁrst woman (to be) educated 
at Marston College in south Wales. / 
Marge Scott, the ﬁrst woman (to be) 
educated at Marston College in south 
Wales, has died aged 95.
4 The conference (held) in Singapore, 
which approved the world trade 
agreement drawn up by European and 
Asian states, has now ended.
5 A book on gardening, All about Plants, 
that / which Anna wanted to borrow, 
wasn’t available in the library. / A book 
on gardening called All about Plants 
that / which Anna wanted to borrow 
wasn’t available in the library.
266
Key to Exercises
6 A painting found in a second-hand 
shop by Lara Gruber, an antique dealer 
from Austria, is thought to be by 
J.M.W. Turner, the British landscape 
artist. (or… by the British landscape 
artist J.M.W. Turner.)
57 .4
1 The sentence could mean: (i) that a 
man was wearing a grey suit – he was 
talking; (ii) (the ridiculous) that a man 
was talking with a grey suit. To remove 
the ambiguity the sentence should be:
 A man (who was) wearing a grey suit 
was talking. / A man in a grey suit was 
talking.
2 The sentence could mean: (i) that the 
lorry was carrying thousands of stolen 
cigarettes – it was stopped by a police 
ofﬁcer; (ii) (the ridiculous) that the 
police ofﬁcer was carrying thousands 
of stolen cigarettes at the time  
s/he stopped the lorry. To remove the 
ambiguity the sentence should be:
 A lorry (which was) carrying thousands 
of stolen cigarettes was stopped by a 
police ofﬁcer.
3 The sentence could mean: (i) that I am 
going to discuss the matter with my 
parents; (ii) that I am going to decorate 
the room and my parents will help 
decorate it with me; (iii) (the ridiculous) 
that I am going to use my parents as 
decoration in the room! To remove the 
ambiguity the sentence should be:
 I discussed with my parents my plan to 
decorate the room. (to mean [i]) or
 I discussed my plan to decorate the 
room with the help of my parents (to 
mean [ii]).
UNIT 58
58. 1
2 Dressed ( or Being dressed) all in black, 
she was almost invisible in the starless 
night. 
3 Not having a credit card, I found it 
difﬁcult to book an airline ticket online. 
4 Being unemployed, Antonio spent a lot 
of time ﬁlling in job application forms.
5 Walking quickly, I soon caught up with 
her.
6 Built of wood ( or Being built of wood 
…), the house was clearly a ﬁre risk. 
7 Having been told off the day before for 
arriving late, I was eager to catch the 
bus in good time. 
8 Not knowing where the theatre was, 
she asked for directions at the hotel 
reception. 
9 Being a nurse, she knew what to do 
after the accident.
10 Having spent his childhood in Oslo, he 
knew the city well. 
58.2
1 D (ﬁrst implied subject = ‘I’; second 
subject = ‘a car’) Waiting for the bus, 
I was splashed all over by a car that 
went through a puddle. / While I was 
waiting for the bus, a car went through 
a puddle and splashed water all over 
me.
2 S (subject in both clauses = ‘Rashid’)
3 S (subject in both clauses = ‘Suzanne’)
4 D (ﬁrst implied subject ‘we’; second 
subject = ‘the town’) Looking down 
from the hill, we could see the town 
spread out before us towards the 
coast. / As we looked down from the 
hill, we could see the town spread out 
before us towards the coast.
5 D (ﬁrst implied subject = ‘I’; second 
subject = ‘the boat’) I was feeling 
rather sick as the boat ploughed 
through the huge waves.
6 S (subject in both clauses = ‘the plant’)
58.3
1 Not wishing to boast … 
2 Pretending not to notice … 
3 Determined not to be beaten … 
4 Not feeling well … 
5 Not bothering to put on his coat … 
6 Trying not to cry … 
58.4
2 + c   Looking over my shoulder, I could 
see Ida running after me.
3 + f   Walking through the tunnel, I 
banged my head on the low roof.
4 + a   Having waited six weeks for the 
washing machine to be delivered, I 
decided to cancel the order.
5 + g   Having suffered from depression 
myself as a teenager, I could 
understand how Nathan was feeling.
6 + h   Having parked / Parking the car 
about a kilometre from the stadium, I 
walked the rest of the way. 
7 + b   Having reached / Reaching my 
mid-thirties, I felt I needed to change 
my life.
8 + e   Having learnt some Swahili as a 
child, I was able to understand most of 
what she said. 
UNIT 59
59. 1
2 While being interviewed …
3 Before taking … 
4 While welcoming … 
5 Since being overthrown … ( or After 
being overthrown …) 
6 Through working … ( or After working 
…)
7 Before being sold … 
8 After leaving … 
59.2
2 + a   By giving up sugar, she soon began 
to lose weight. 
3 + e   In turning down the job, she gave 
up the possibility of a huge salary. 
(‘By turning down’ is also possible. 
However, ‘In turning down’ focuses on 
the consequence of the action and so 
is perhaps more likely here.)
4 + b   By moving to a smaller ﬂat, 
she saved over a hundred pounds a 
month. (‘In moving …’ is also possible. 
However, ‘By moving …’focuses on the 
method used to save money.)
5 + f   On entering the classroom, she 
was surprised when all the children 
stood up. 
6 + c   In criticising her father, she 
knew that she might offend him. 
(‘By criticising’ is also possible. 
However, ‘In criticising’ focuses on the 
consequence of the action and so is 
perhaps more likely here.)
59.3
1 With Maryam having ﬂu, we couldn’t 
go on holiday.
2 Without having more information, I 
won’t be able to advise you. 
3 Without realising it, he had solved the 
problem.
4 With time running out before the train 
left, I couldn’t wait for Andrei any 
longer.
59.4
(1) Although from a poor background, 
Paula Regis gained a place at Southam 
University. (2) Always fascinated by 
the stars, she took a ﬁrst degree in 
astrophysics. (3) Once at university she 
also became interested in student politics 
and, (4) popular with her fellow students, 
was elected University President in her 
second year. This didn’t distract her from 
her studies, however, and (5) while in 
the ﬁnal year of her degree, she won the 
International Young Scientist of the Year 
award for her work on star classiﬁcation. 
(6) When asked what was  (or When 
asked about …) the secret of her success 
(or When asked what the secret of her 
success was …) she said,  ‘Just hard 
work and a little luck.’ (7) Determined to 
continue her research, she has recently 
begun work on her PhD.
UNIT 60
60. 1
2 prepared (herself) 
3 prides itself on
4 occupied themselves with / by (‘with’ 
and ‘by’ could be omitted: ‘occupied 
themselves playing computer games’)
267
Key to Exercises
5 adapt (yourself) 
6 trouble himself about / with 
7 dress (herself) 
8 absent himself from
60.2
1 me 
2 myself
3 us 
4 them 
5 yourself 
6 himself (‘him’ is also possible if ‘ he’ 
and ‘him’ refer to different people)
7 herself (‘her’ is also possible if ‘ she’ 
and ‘her’ refer to different people)
8 me
60.3
1 got ourselves vaccinated / got 
vaccinated
2 ✓
3 had themselves checked
4 he’d caught hepatitis himself
5 ✓ (however, some people think this is 
incorrect and would use ‘Jan and I’)
6 to tear himself away 
7 we’re going to occupy ourselves
8 they can’t reach it themselves 
UNIT 61
61.1
1  ones  some
2  ✓
3  ones  some
4 … mint  one  … / … some mint …
5  ✓
6  ✓
7  ones  one
8  ones  some
61.2
1 ones 
2 ones (Some people would avoid this 
use of ‘ones’ to refer to people.)
3 No 
4 one
5 No (‘ones’ would be unlikely here, 
referring to a group of people)
6 ones
7 one
8 No
9 No
10 No (‘your ones’ is possible, but some 
people avoid it. ‘Are these yours?’ is 
much more likely)
61.3
3 (ones) Note that some people think 
that ‘those ones’ is incorrect.
4 (one)
5 ✓
6 (one)
7 ✓
8 (ones)
9 (ones)
10 (one)
61.4
Possible answers
1  … one who knew the way.
2  … ones you have to drive to. 
3  … one is the burning of fossil fuels.
4  … ones are small and lightweight
UNIT 62
62. 1
2 ‘I doubt it’ is also possible.
3 I hope so.
4 I suppose so.
5 I think so.
6 Yes, I hear (that) she is. (‘So I hear’ is 
also possible; see E)
7 I guess so.
8 He says so.
9 I promise (that) I will.
10 I’m sure (that) you will.
62.2
1  suppose not / don’t suppose so
2  don’t think so / think not  (‘think not’ 
would be rather formal)
 3  suspect not / don’t suspect so
4  doesn’t appear so / appears not
5  didn’t say so
62.3
2 Yes, they are. 
3 Yes, it has . / So it has. 
4 Yes, you did.
62.4
Possible answers
2 So I understand.
3 So I gather.
4 So it appears.
5 So he tells me.
UNIT 63
63. 1
2 She was asked to teach more classes, 
and was happy to do so. 
3 My French hosts gave me snails to eat, 
but I did so very reluctantly. 
4 The company wanted to build a dam 
on the site, but they were prevented 
from doing so by local opposition. 
5 All EU countries agreed to implement 
the new regulations on recycling 
plastic, but so far only Finland and 
Austria have done so.
6 The water freezes in the cracks in 
rocks, and as it does so it expands.
63.2
1 do so 
2 do (not ‘do so’; habitual action) 
3 doing so
4 do (not ‘do so’; ‘enjoy’ refers to a 
state)
5 does so 
6 do (not ‘do so’; ‘smell’ refers to a state)
7 do (not ‘do so’; habitual action)
8 did so 
63.3
2 such research
3 such claims / such a claim
4 such a project 
5 such destruction
6 such tactics / such a tactic
63.4 
Example answers
2 … into research of this kind
3 … claims like this ( or these) / a claim 
like this. 
4 … this kind of project …
5 … this sort of destruction …
6 … these tactics / this tactic …
UNIT 64
64. 1
2 Yes, we should  have booked tickets  
 in advance.  / Yes, we should have  
 booked tickets in advance. 
3 Yes, we will  be staying in Brazil  
 permanently.  / Yes, we will be  
 staying in Brazil permanently. 
4 Yes, I’m sure they will  have been  
 taken by now.  / Yes, I’m sure they will 
have  been taken by now.  / Yes, I’m 
sure they will have been  
 taken by now. 
5 No, I haven’t  had dinner yet. 
6 Yes, I am  going to Katalin’s party. 
7 Yes, I would  have missed the train.  / 
Yes, I would have  missed the train. 
8 No, I can’t  see him anywhere. 
9 No, he couldn’t  have been looking. or 
No, he couldn’t have  been  
 looking . / No, he couldn’t have been  
looking. 
64.2
2 do 
3 has 
4 do 
5 (do)
6 hasn’t / doesn’t 
7 is
8 have (done) / did 
9 have / do 
10 (be) 
64.3
2 might / would (be)
3 might / should (be)
4 should (be)
5 might / would be
6 should (be) / would
7 would / might be
8 would / might be
UNIT 65
65. 1
2 used to
3 pretended to be
4 used to be
5 claimed to
268
Key to Exercises
6 pretended to / claimed to
7 expected it to be
8 expected to
65.2
1 opportunity (to) 
2 hated to
3 refused (to)
4 choose to
5 determined (to)
6 deserved to
7 idea (to)
8 delighted (to)
9 prefer to
10 afford to
65.3
1 … if you’d like to ( or … if you like)
2 ✓ (or … you’d like to.)
3 … she doesn’t want to.
4 ✓ (or … if she’d like.)
5 ✓ (or … where I want to.)
6 … if you don’t want to. (However, ‘if 
you don’t want’ is sometimes used in 
colloquial speech)
7 ✓ (or … if they want to.)
8 … I’d like to very much.
9 … you like. ( or you’d like to)
10 … so I didn’t like to.
UNIT 66
66. 1
Suggested corrections are given
2 a lone ﬁgure / a ﬁgure walking alone
3 ✓
4 a happy / cheerful person / a person 
who was always glad and smiling
5 his sleeping daughter / his daughter, 
who was asleep
6 frightened passengers / passengers on 
board who are afraid
7 ✓
8 a similar age
9 ✓
10 The girls, who were sorry for their 
behaviour, apologised to their teacher. 
/ The girls apologised to their teacher 
because they were sorry for their 
behaviour. 
66.2
1 a an utter / inevitable
 b inevitable.
2 a  unsafe (‘domestic’ would only 
be possible here if we wanted to 
emphasise that the equipment was 
for use in the home (i.e. domestic) 
rather than another kind of 
equipment)
 b domestic / unsafe
3 a educational / entertaining
 b educational / entertaining
4 a serious
 b serious / underlying
5 a legal / stupid
 b legal / stupid
66.3
1 all the people concerned
2 As the minister responsible 
3 the opposite effect. 
4 a responsible adult. 
5 the only available room / the only 
room available 
6 the apparent approval
7 and concerned parents 
8 ﬁnancial advice available 
UNIT 67
67 . 1
The most likely answers are given
1 almost / practically complete
2 mainly cotton 
3 absolutely excellent
4 very clear
5 completely illegal
6 very popular
7 an almost permanent
8 very attractive
9 exclusively / mainly male 
10  very visible
67 .2
Suggested answers:
2 I’d be incredibly upset.
3 I’d be rather angry.
4 I’d be a bit embarrassed.
5 I’d be extremely annoyed.
67 .3
Suggested corrections are given, but others 
are possible
1 extremely old
2 ✓
3 absolutely useless
4 very happy
5 ‘reasonably unique’ is unlikely; more 
likely is, for example, ‘almost unique’ 
6 ✓
7 ✓
8 quite small
9 perfectly comfortable
10 ✓
11 reasonably quiet
12 virtually impossible
13 ✓
14 a really terrible
15 simply awful 
16 ✓
67 .4
1  fairly  / really
2  really / fairly (both correct)
3  fairly  / really 
4  pretty / very (both correct)
5  very  / pretty 
6  pretty /  very 
7  really /  fairly 
8  really / very (both correct)
9  pretty /  very 
10  fairly / pretty (both correct)
UNIT 68
68. 1
The most likely answers are given
2 very late
3 very critical
4 a straight
5 false
6 a critical
7 late 
8 original 
9 very straight
10 very false 
68.2
2 a highly technical
 b technical
3 a very human
 b human
4 a largely academic
 b academic 
5 a private
 b an intensely private
6 a diplomatic 
 b an extremely diplomatic
68.3
Possible answers are given
2 … nice and quiet
3 … lovely and soft
4 … nice and juicy
5 … good and ready
UNIT 69
69. 1
2 … the problems identiﬁed. / the 
identiﬁed problems.
3 Interested visitors …
4 … the sheet provided.
5 … with ﬂights included.
6 … the resulting publicity / the 
publicity resulting … 
7 … any remaining cheese. / any cheese 
remaining.
69.2
Example answers
2  The amount of added sugar in dark 
chocolate is less than that found in 
white chocolate.
3  Organic oranges contain 30% 
more vitamin C than those grown 
conventionally. 
4  Cars today are much more fuel-
efﬁcient than those manufactured in 
1990.
5  The President’s salary is 25 times 
higher than that earned by the average 
citizen. 
269
Key to Exercises
69.3
2 well-resourced 
3 nerve-wracking
4 far-reaching
69.4
2 were wide-ranging
3 is clean-shaven
4 eye-catching
UNIT 70
70. 1
1 to reduce
2 to cheat / cheating
3 knowing
4 to leave
5 to underestimate /  underestimating
6 to open / opening 
7 talking 
8 to resign / resigning 
9  to panic
10 turning
70.2
1 stupid going / stupid to go
2 conﬁdent that he wouldn’t get lost
3 ✓
4 guilty shopping
5 was concerned to learn 
6 ✓
7 ✓
8 busy drinking 
9 was sorry to (have) upset me / was 
sorry that he’d upset me (‘was sorry 
for upsetting me’ is also possible)
10 wasn’t prepared to admit
11 ✓
70.3
2 It was wonderful to hear such a 
magniﬁcent performance. 
3 It was mean of you to eat all the cake 
and not leave any for me. 
4 It was unreasonable of them to 
complain about the exam results. 
5 It was awkward to get the top off the 
jar. (or … to get the top of the jar off.; 
informally … getting the top off the 
jar.)
6 It was simple to put up the shelves. 
7 It was unprofessional of him to criticise 
the headteacher in front of the staff. 
8 It was kind of you to give birthday 
presents to the children.
70.4
Possible answers are given
2 It made me furious listening to his lies. 
3 It made me sad that we wouldn’t be 
working together again. 
4 It made me ashamed to learn how 
badly we treated immigrants in the 
1950s. 
5 It made me nervous hearing the 
dentist’s drill as I sat in the waiting 
room.
UNIT 71
71. 1
1 repeatedly
2 in / with despair (‘despairingly’ is also 
possible)
3 in / with anticipation
4 reputedly
5 disappointedly
6 in a relaxed way / manner / fashion
7 determinedly 
8 in / with satisfaction (‘in a satisﬁed way 
/ manner / fashion’ are also possible)
9 in an organised way / manner / fashion
10 agitatedly
71.2
1 a most
 b mostly
2 a short
 b shortly
3 a directly
 b direct
4 a wide
 b widely
5 a highly
 b high
71.3
1 ✓
2 … to me in a friendly way / manner / 
fashion.
3 ✓ (or … ﬁne …)
4 … ﬂatly refused.
5 ✓ (‘… very clear’ is also possible in 
informal contexts)
6 … in a cowardly way / manner / 
fashion …
7 … justly renowned.
8 … slowly turned …
9 ‘thinly’ is grammatically correct, 
but some people would use ‘thin’ in 
informal contexts
10 … loudly applauded …
UNIT 72
72. 1
1 more scared
2 deeper or more deep (for emphasis)
3 more pretty
4 stronger
5 more naughty
6 harder
7 truer or more true (for emphasis)
8 longer
72.2
2    ✓ (‘more dirty’ would also be 
possible)
3   recenter  more recent
4   excitinger  more exciting
5   ✓ (‘wealthier’ would also be possible)
6    ✓ (‘more unique’ is used to suggest 
that some people have particularly 
individual characteristics)
7   complexer  more complex
8    ✓ (‘more clever’ would also be 
possible)
9   powerfuler  more powerful
10   alerter  more alert
72.3
‘the’ can be left out in 2, 4 and 5.
72.4
1 in 
2 of
3 of
4 in or of (both are possible)
5 in 
UNIT 73
73. 1
2 The Downtown Hotel is not such a 
pleasant place to stay as the Strand 
Hotel. / The Downtown Hotel is not as 
pleasant a place to stay as the Strand 
Hotel.
3 The President’s address to the nation 
is as important a speech as he is ever 
likely to make in his career. 
4 It wasn’t such a big problem as I ﬁrst 
thought. / It wasn’t as big a problem as 
I ﬁrst thought.
5 Theresa’s dog is as ferocious an animal 
as I’ve ever seen.
6 She’s not such a ﬂuent Greek speaker 
as she claims to be. / She’s not as ﬂuent 
a Greek speaker as she claims to be.
73.2
1 as many as
2 as few as
3 as much as 
4 As many as 
5 as little as
6 as few as
7 as little as
8 as much as
73.3
2 + a   Her handwriting was so untidy as 
to be nearly illegible.
3 + e   The bookcase was so heavy as to be 
almost impossible to move. 
4 + c   The CD was so badly scratched as 
to be unplayable. 
5 + f   The plot of the novel was so 
complicated as to be completely 
incomprehensible. 
6 + b   The difference between the results 
was so small as to be insigniﬁcant.
73.4
1 How serious an injury
2 or as serious as 
3 bad enough to
4 not as ﬁt as
5 not such a good player as / not as 
good a player as
6 go so far as to say
7 sufﬁciently well /  well enough 
8 as speedy a recovery as possible
270
Key to Exercises
UNIT 74
74.1
1 I expect Catalina to win the race 
easily.
2 He regretted missing the concert 
greatly. / He greatly regretted missing 
the concert. 
3 I secretly hated playing the piano … 
(more likely than ‘I hated playing the 
piano secretly, although my parents 
thought I loved it.’ This would mean 
that my parents thought I loved 
playing the piano secretly.)
4 He calmly started to walk across … / 
He started to walk calmly across …
5 She kindly offered to do the work.
6 Bruno hurriedly ﬁnished speaking and 
sat down. / Bruno ﬁnished speaking 
hurriedly and sat down.
7 I simply don’t remember putting it 
down.
8 We look forward to hearing from you 
soon. 
9 They deliberately tried to ignore me. / 
They tried to ignore me deliberately.
10 I don’t pretend to understand the 
instructions completely.
74.2
1 around Switzerland / in July (place + 
time)
2 a car / at the airport (object + 
adverbial)
3 south / towards the lakes (place 
[adverb] + place [prepositional phrase])
4 for a week / in a beautiful cottage 
belonging to some friends of Kim’s 
mother (time + place [long adverbial])
5 early / at about six o’clock (time 
[adverb] + time [prepositional phrase])
6 brieﬂy / in the village where Kim had 
spent some time when she was a 
student (time + place [long adverbial])
7 carefully on the narrow winding roads 
(manner + place)
8 the train / home (object + adverb)
9 ourselves / enormously / in Switzerland  
(object + manner + place)
10 there / before too long (place + time)
74.3
2 ✓ or Next, vigorously beat the eggs in 
a small bowl. (Both of these are more 
likely than ‘Next, beat the eggs in a 
small bowl vigorously’). 
3 I thought I’d securely locked the 
luggage. / I thought I’d locked the 
luggage securely. 
4 I stopped playing tennis regularly … 
(more likely)
5 ✓ or Lee was beaten easily in the ﬁnal. 
/ Lee was beaten in the ﬁnal easily.
6 He always brings sandwiches from 
home.
7 No, they moved away last year.
8 The local residents welcomed warmly 
the decision … or The local residents 
warmly welcomed the decision …
9 ✓
UNIT 75
75. 1
2 a  I was brought up to earn money 
honestly … 
 b  Honestly, I’m perfectly capable of 
putting up the shelf myself.
3 a she admitted frankly …
 b  Frankly, I went to sleep during his 
lecture …
4 a  Seriously, I don’t know what I’d 
have done …
 b  I tried to speak seriously to him … 
5 a  Clearly, he wants me to take the job.
 b  I’d had very little sleep and was 
having difﬁculty thinking clearly.
6 a Plainly, he was feeling ill at ease.
 b She always dressed plainly …
75.2
1  enormously  / signiﬁcantly
2  from time to time  / rarely 
3  easily /  scarcely 
4  almost /  by an hour 
5  often /  on many occasions 
6  hardly ever  / every week
7  greatly  / rarely 
8  nearly  / entirely 
75.3
1 [1] & [3]
2 [1] & [3]
3 [2]
4 [1] & [3]
5 [2] & [3]
6 [1] & [2]
UNIT 76
76.1
2 … and out jumped Daniel. 
3 Outside the door stood two small 
children. 
4 In the park the boys were playing 
cricket, despite the muddy conditions. 
(no inversion)
5 Around her neck hung a jade necklace. 
6 … and up the tree it climbed. (no 
inversion)
7 … and in marched a delegation from 
the striking workers. 
8 … away swam the ﬁsh. 
9 … in the corner was a very old 
grandfather clock. 
10 In the ofﬁce Lea found (no inversion) 
it difﬁcult to concentrate, but at 
home she worked (no inversion) more 
efﬁciently. 
76.2
2 … last week I had a holiday. (subject–
verb inversion is not possible: ‘last 
week’ is an adverb of time indicating a 
period; does not take inversion [see C])
3 … ﬁrst came a welcoming address by 
the head of the organising team. 
4 … at no time were members of the 
public in danger. 
5 No change; the adverb ‘daily’ can’t go 
in front position.
6 … seldom can a politician have 
changed his views so quickly as Beckett. 
7 … next came a blizzard, preventing us 
from leaving the hut.
8 … by next Friday we’ll be in Japan. 
(subject–verb inversion is not possible: 
‘by next Friday’ is an adverb of time 
indicating a deﬁnite point; does not 
take inversion [see C])
9 No change; the adverb ‘hourly’ can’t 
go in front position. 
10  … hardly ever did I hear him raise his 
voice in anger.
76.3
1  I play squash twice a week / twice a 
week I play squash
2  your salary will be paid monthly
3  ✓
4  ✓
5  Around the town she drove / She drove 
around the town; in a side street she 
spotted the place / she spotted the 
place in a side street
6 across the room it ﬂew / it ﬂew across 
the room
UNIT 77
77 . 1
1   very  /  much  / very much
2   very  / much / very much
3   very /  much  / very much
4   very  / much / very much
5   very  /  much  / very much
6   very  / much / very much
7   very /  much  /  very much 
8   very /  much  / very much
9  very  /  much  / very much
10   very  / much / very much
77 .2
1 too
2 very / too
3 very
4 very
5 very / too 
6 too 
7 very
8 too
77 .3
1 … and he even offered … 
2 I will only be … 
3 … and even the smallest donation can 
make …
4 … he has even asked Ann … 
5 Only Louis knew … 
6 … I only cook …
271
Key to Exercises
UNIT 78
78.1
A number of positions for these adverbs 
are possible, depending on the wider 
context and the particular emphasis that 
the speaker / writer wants to give. The 
ﬁrst answer below gives perhaps the most 
likely position in many contexts, and then 
alternatives.
2 … Presumably, the idea is to welcome 
visitors from other countries. / The 
idea, presumably, is to welcome … / 
The idea is, presumably, to welcome 
… / … other countries, presumably.
3 The builders generously agreed to 
plant new trees to replace the ones 
they had dug up. / Generously, the 
builders agreed … / The builders 
agreed generously to plant…
4 Most people rightly believe that the 
prisoners should be released. / Rightly, 
most people … / Most people believe, 
rightly, that …
5 Obviously, she knew more about the 
robbery than she told the police. / She 
obviously knew … / … told the police, 
obviously.
6 He carelessly broke the window when 
he was painting. / Carelessly, he  
broke …
7 She bravely picked up the spider and 
put it outside. / Bravely, she picked 
up… / She picked up the spider  
bravely …
8 Interestingly, the road didn’t appear 
on the satnav. 
78.2
2 … outwardly she looked remarkably 
calm. 
3 … environmentally it is no longer the 
problem it once was. 
4 … industrially it is relatively 
undeveloped. 
5 … visually the performance was 
stunning. 
6 … ﬁnancially we’d be much better off 
if we moved there. 
7 … politically he claims to be a socialist. 
8 … technically she could be sent to 
prison.
78.3 
Suggested answers are given
2 In geological terms, limestone is a 
relatively new rock. 
3 The building is similar to the 
opera house in Milan in terms of 
architecture.
4 From a grammatical point of view 
the essay was well written, but its 
style was inappropriate. 
5 The election was clearly rigged and the 
result is a severe blow to the country 
as far as democracy is concerned. 
UNIT 79
79. 1
1 as / when (‘when’ emphasises a direct 
connection between kicking the ball 
and falling over – it suggests that 
kicking the ball caused her to then 
fall over;  ‘as’ suggests ‘at the same 
time as’ – kicking and falling happened 
simultaneously)
2 When (more likely than ‘While …’; 
talking about a period of our lives)
3 When  
4 While / As
5 while / when (‘as’ could mean  
‘because’ here) 
6 when
7 As / When
8 as
9 while / as
10 As / When (‘When’ suggests ‘By the 
time the paint is dry’; ‘As’ emphasises a 
continuous change during the period it 
is drying)
79.2
1   As  When
2   When  While / As
3   while  when 
4   ✓
5   While  When / As (= ‘because’) 
6   as  when
79.3
1 until
2 Before / Until
3 before / until
4 before
5 Before / Until
6 until
7 before / until
8 until
79.4 
Possible answers are given
2 … than he broke his arm. 
3 … when it rang again. 
4 … than / when it was time to start 
work again. 
5 … before members of the audience 
started to criticise her. 
6 … when the engine cut out.
UNIT 80
80. 1
2 + b   Andrea agreed to book tickets for 
us all as it was her idea to go to the 
theatre.
3 + a   Seeing as it’s your birthday, I’ll buy 
you lunch. 
4 + h   Because I’m trying to lose weight 
I’ve given up dairy products. 
5 + d   We were recommended to buy the 
textbook second-hand since a new 
copy would be very expensive.
6 + c   As the guest lecturer was late, 
Dr Gomez spoke about his research 
instead. 
7 + e   I suggested we all go on holiday 
together seeing that we get on so 
well.
8 + g   You should never walk under a 
ladder because it’s supposed to be 
unlucky.
80.2
2 … due to lack of interest.
3 … due to / owing to its central location.
4 … due to human error.
5 … due to / owing to heavy cloud.
6 … because of the bright sunlight.
7 … because his mobile was switched off.
8 … because of local opposition.
9 … because of his age.
10 … because there was a ﬂy in it.
80.3
2 I couldn’t hear what Isabella was 
saying with the noise. / With the noise, 
I couldn’t hear what Isabella was 
saying. / I couldn’t hear what Isabella 
was saying for the noise.
3 With her father (being) in hospital, 
Olivia went to stay with her aunt. / 
Olivia went to stay with her aunt, with 
her father (being) in hospital. 
4 With all the exercise I was doing I felt a 
lot ﬁtter. / I felt a lot ﬁtter with all the 
exercise I was doing. / I felt a lot ﬁtter 
for all the exercise I was doing.
5 With the train drivers on strike 
tomorrow, I don’t think I’ll go to town 
after all. / I don’t think I’ll go to town 
after all, with the train drivers on strike 
tomorrow.
UNIT 81
81. 1
2 + h  He packed his suitcase with the 
books at the bottom so as not to / in 
order not to crush his clothes. 
3 + a   Bus fares in the city were being 
cut so as to / in order to encourage 
people to use public transport. 
4 + f   We crept quietly towards the deer 
so as not to / in order not to frighten 
them away. 
5 + c   I walked around the outside of the 
ﬁeld so as not to / in order not to 
damage the growing crops.
6 + b   We put up a fence so as to / in 
order to prevent people walking across 
the grass. 
7 + g   She looked down at the book in 
front of her so as to / in order to 
avoid his gaze. 
8 + e   The roadworks were carried out at 
night so as not to / in order not to 
disrupt trafﬁc too much.
272
Key to Exercises
81.2
2 ✗
3 ✓
4 ✗
5 ✗
6 ✓
7 ✓
8 ✗
81.3
2 … nobody would know it was there. 
3 … mosquitoes couldn’t get in. 
4 … it won’t take up a lot of computer 
memory.
5 … we could see the view over the city. 
6 … it will receive the new channels.
81.4
Suggested answers are given
2 The meeting room is designed in such 
a way that everyone’s voice can be 
heard without the use of microphones.  
/ … in such a way as to allow 
everyone’s voice to be heard without 
the use of microphones. 
3 The website is organised in such a way 
that it is easy to navigate. / … in such 
a way as to be easy to navigate.  
4 If the dial is rotated in such a way that 
the number 1 is at the top, the valve 
opens. / … in such a way as to locate 
the number 1 at the top, the valve 
opens.
UNIT 82
82. 1
2 + b   Frightened though / as she was, she 
forced herself to pick up the snake. 
3 + e   Scarce though / as food became, 
they always found enough to share 
with me.
4 + c   Experienced though / as the 
climbers were, they had never faced 
such severe conditions before. 
5 + a   Confusing though / as the 
instructions ﬁrst appeared, they were 
very useful when I looked at them in 
detail.
6 + h   Disgusting though / as it looked, it 
was actually quite tasty. 
7 + f   Conﬁdent though / as she felt, she 
knew the examination would not be 
easy.
8 + d   Successful though / as their new 
products have proved, the company is 
still in ﬁnancial difﬁculties.
82.2
2 In spite of being much younger 
than the others, he was the most 
outstanding rider in the team. 
3 In spite of eating a big lunch, he had a 
three-course meal in the evening. 
4 In spite of his fear, he allowed the huge 
spider to be placed in his hands. 
5 In spite of her obvious intelligence, she 
ﬁnds it difﬁcult to express her ideas in 
writing. 
6 In spite of her illness, she went on a 
walking holiday in Nepal.
2 Despite the fact that he was much 
younger than the others, he was the 
most outstanding rider in the team. 
3 Despite the fact that he ate / had 
eaten a big lunch, he had a three-
course meal in the evening. 
4 Despite the fact that he was 
frightened, he allowed the huge spider 
to be placed in his hands. 
5 Despite the fact that she is obviously 
intelligent, she ﬁnds it difﬁcult to 
express her ideas in writing. 
6 Despite the fact that she was ill, she 
went on a walking holiday in Nepal.
82.3
1 even though
2 even if
3 Even if
4 Even though
5 even though
6 even if
7 Even though
8 even if
82.4
2  Whereas a decade ago only 5% of 
students dropped out of college, the 
ﬁgure today is 25%.
3  While the temperature is below 
freezing, it actually feels quite warm 
when the sun is out.
4  While the cost of rail travel has 
increased, the number of train 
passengers has grown.
5  Whereas I’ve always wanted to visit 
Australia, I’ve never had any wish to go 
to Canada.
UNIT 83
83. 1 
Suggested answers are given
2 … give me a call. / … take it back to 
the shop. 
3 … tell him I want to see him. / … ask 
him to come and see me. 
4 If you see any large, hairy spiders in 
the grass … / If you come across any 
snakes on your walk …
5 If you’re ever in Birmingham … / If you 
ever need any more advice …
6 If you’re coming by bus … / If you 
don’t want to walk far to the shops …
83.2
1 The present perfect suggests ‘if you 
previously studied Macbeth …’; the 
present simple suggests ‘if you study 
Macbeth in the future, then you will 
(get to) know …’.
2 leave / have left; meet. The present 
perfect and the present simple have a 
similar meaning.
3 break / have broken; have to. The 
present perfect suggests that you 
may have broken it (perhaps I think 
you have); the present simple may be 
a warning or threat about a possible 
future event.
4 doesn’t arrive / hasn’t arrived; give. 
The present perfect and the present 
simple have a similar meaning.
5 haven’t ﬁlled in / don’t ﬁll in; need. 
The present perfect suggests ‘if you 
previously ﬁlled in an application 
form’; the present simple may imply 
‘If you don’t ﬁll in an application form 
now, you will need to do so …’. 
6 don’t help / haven’t helped; go. The 
present perfect and the present simple 
have a similar meaning.
83.3
1 belonged 
2  ✓
3  liked
4  doubted
5  ✓
6  understood
83.4
2 If it were not for his anxiety over 
Carla, his happiness would have been 
complete. 
3 Were it not for the intervention 
of the government (or … for (the) 
government intervention / intervening 
…), the strike would probably still be 
going on.
4 Had it not been for the arrival of the 
police (or … for the police arriving …), 
the ﬁght could have got out of hand. 
5 But for the sound of birds singing, 
everything was quiet. 
6 If it was not / were not for the United 
Nations, there would have been far 
more wars in the last 50 years. 
7 If it had not been for the roadworks we 
would have been here two hours ago. 
UNIT 84
84. 1
2 Had you not been absent from school 
on Friday, you would know what you 
have to do for homework. 
3 Were Clare’s friends still living in 
Brussels, she would have been able to 
stay with them. (or Were her friends 
still living in Brussels, Clare would …)
4 Were the workers prepared to accept a 
wage cut, the factory would not have 
had to shut down. 
5 Should the ﬁnancial performance of 
the company not improve in the near 
future, we shall have to reduce the 
number of employees. 
6 Had the salary been higher, I might 
have considered taking the job. 
84.2
1 ✗ If I press this button …
2 ✓
3 ✓
4 ✗ If the disease is untreated … (or … 
goes untreated …)
273
Key to Exercises
5 ✓
6 ✗ If you complain about me …
7 ✓
84.3
1 If I happen to see Georgia when I’m in 
Rome …
2 ✗
3 … if you happen to live nearby. 
4 ✗
5 If you happen to be in the south of 
Spain next week, …
84.4 
Possible answers are given using the notes
2 … overcome with a great weariness. 
3 … trying to imagine what it contained. 
4 … to agree with everything Julia said. 
(or … agreeing with …)
5 … it had been reversed into a wall.
UNIT 85
85. 1
2 + d   Were the government to increase 
university fees, there would be an 
outcry from students. 
3 + a   Were anyone to lean against the 
window, the glass would certainly break. 
4 + c   Were I not already busy in August, I 
would gladly accept your invitation. 
5 + b   Were you to see the conditions 
in which the refugees are living, you 
would be horriﬁed.
85.2 
Possible sentences are given
2 Imagine you were to inherit a million 
dollars. 
3 Suppose your parents were to tell you 
they were emigrating to Canada.
4 Supposing Spain were to win the 
World Cup.
5 Imagine the population of Britain were 
all Buddhist. 
85.3 
2 even if it were 
3 even if she were
4 as if I were
5 as if she were
6 even if I were
7 as if it were 
8 even if they were 
85.4
Possible answers
2 I’d sooner she were going with friends. 
3 B: Well, if only it were as easy as that.
4 I know you haven’t got much time, but 
if I were you I’d have breakfast before 
you leave. 
5 Wearing odd shoes to school was 
embarrassing and I’d rather it were 
forgotten by my classmates.
6 I’m very fond of Paul, but I wish he 
were not so critical of his employees.
UNIT 86
86. 1
2 + d   Unless alternative sources of 
funding are found, the research will 
not be able to continue.
3 + c   Unless the roads have changed in 
that part of town, I’m sure I’ll be able 
to ﬁnd my way there.
4 + a   Unless the weather starts 
improving soon, the farmers will lose 
their crops.
5 + e   Unless it’s ridiculously expensive, I 
think I’ll buy that painting. 
6 + f   Unless you have been unemployed 
for six months, you are not entitled to 
state beneﬁt. 
86.2
2  ✓ ‘If the infection isn’t treated’ is also 
possible.
3  If he wasn’t
4  ✓ ‘if you don’t have’ is also possible.
5  if Anya doesn’t pass
6  If you don’t get
7  ✓ ‘if they don’t get’ is also possible.
8  if Louise isn’t at home
9 ✓ ‘if they can’t prove’ is also possible.
10 if she wasn’t
86.3
1 if / whether 
2 whether 
3 whether
4 if / whether
5 whether ( or informally ‘if’)
6 whether
7 if / whether
8 if / whether
9 whether
10 if / whether
11 whether
12 if / whether
UNIT 87
87 . 1
2 A small boy was kicking a ball against 
a wall; otherwise, the street was 
deserted.
3 I couldn’t remember meeting him 
before, yet his face seemed familiar. 
4 A mass evacuation of islanders is 
taking place. Meanwhile, the volcano 
continues to erupt. 
5 A: Why don’t you like that new French 
restaurant? B: For one thing, it’s too 
expensive. 
6 Ingrid came down with ﬂu while we 
were on holiday. 
7 My landlady didn’t mind me having 
parties in my room as long as the rent 
was paid on time. 
8 One way of getting rid of weeds is to 
dig them out. Alternatively, you could 
poison them.
87 .2
1 Nevertheless
2 while
3 even though
4 Even so
5 Instead
6 whereas
7 so
8 Meanwhile 
9 while
10 Before
11 unless
12 At that time
87 .3
Example answers are given
2 However hard you might exercise, it is 
difﬁcult to lose weight without cutting 
down on the amount you eat. 
3 However much we enjoy being 
together, it is important to spend some 
time apart. 
4 Professor Malcolm is always happy to 
spend time with his students, however 
busy he might be. 
5  However many times I see the Eiffel 
Tower, it never fails to impress me. 
6  Some people never seem content, 
however much money they have / 
however rich they are.
UNIT 88
88. 1
1 across
2 across / over
3 over
4 across / over
5 across
6 across 
7 across
8 over 
88.2
1 along / through
2 Across 
3 through
4 across / over 
5 over (‘all over’ is more likely than ‘all 
across’ or ‘all through’)
6 along
88.3
1 under
2 ✓ (‘under’ is also possible)
3 below
4 over 
5 ✓ (‘over’ is also possible)
6 over
7 under
8 ✓ (‘above’ is also possible)
88.4
1 c under the weather = ill
2 d below the belt = cruel or unfair
3 b  under her belt = successfully 
completed 
274
Key to Exercises
4 e  under a cloud = with some people’s 
disapproval
5 f  over the top = extreme behaviour; 
indicating disapproval
6 a over and above = in addition to
UNIT 89
89. 1
1  between 
2 among
3 between
4 between
5 among
6 between
7 among
8 among
9 between
89.2
2 between / among the pupils
3 between amateur
4 among teenagers
5 between / among his remaining 
relatives
6 among its clients 
7 between intake of reﬁned sugar
8 between cooking
9 among my closest friends
10 between the striking dockers
89.3
1 among 
2 among
3 between
4 among 
5 between 
6 between
7 among
8 between
9 among
10 between
UNIT 90
90. 1
1 ✓
2 ✗
3 ✗
4 ✓
5 ✗
6 ✗
7 ✓
8 ✓
9 ✗
10 ✓
11 ✗
12 ✓
90.2
1 a by
 b  until (‘until’ would also be possible in 
(a). It would mean, however, that up 
to the time dinner was served I was 
hungry, and then when it was served 
(but before I ate it) I was not. Perhaps 
the food was so unappetising that 
I couldn’t face eating it; ‘by’ in (a) 
simply means that I was hungry 
when dinner was served)
2 a until
 b by
3 a by
 b until
4 a Until
 b  By (‘By’ would also be possible in 
[a])
5 a by
 b until
6 a by
 b until
90.3
1  Over / During
2 So far
3 Until now
4 so far
 5 until now
6 during
7 until
8 by
UNIT 91
91. 1
1 except
2 except / except for
3 except 
4 except for (in informal contexts); more 
formally, ‘but for’ is possible
5 except
6 except / except for (in informal 
contexts)
7 except / except for
8 except / except for (in informal 
contexts)
9 except for (in informal contexts); more 
formally, ‘but for’ is also possible
10 except / except for
11 except
12 except
91.2
1  besides  except for 
2  Besides ✓
3  except for  besides
4  Except for  Besides
5  besides  except (for)
6  except for ✓
91.3
2 + a   But for the interruptions caused by 
the bad weather, the building would 
have been completed by now. 
3 + c   But for the supply of food and 
medicines by the charity (or But for 
the food and medicines supplied by 
the charity …), many more people 
would have died in the famine. 
4 + f   But for the shelter provided by the 
trees, the wind would have caused 
even more damage to the house. 
5 + b   But for the threat of sanctions 
by the EU (or But for the sanctions 
threatened by the EU …), human 
rights would not have improved in the 
country.
6 + d   But for the loan from the bank (or 
But for the loan the bank gave me 
… / … given to me by the bank …), I 
would not have been able to set up my 
business.
UNIT 92
92. 1
1  of  /  for  / about 
2  after  / about /  for 
3  about  /  for  / with 
4  of  /  with  / on 
5 for /  after  /  about 
6 for /  on  /  with 
7 of / about /  on 
92.2
1 for
2 of / about
3 with (note that ‘to’ would also be 
possible)
4 for
5 about
6 on / about 
7 of (‘about’ is unlikely in this formal 
context)
8 about
9 with 
10 of
11 about 
12 about
13 about
14 on (‘about’ is also possible but less 
natural here)
92.3
1 acted on = did what someone else 
advised or suggested; acted for = 
represented (usually a professional 
person such as a lawyer or accountant) 
2 thinking … about = concentrating on; 
think of = asking about an opinion
3 have called on = have formally asked 
him to do it; called for = demanded
4 worked for = was employed by; works 
with computers = uses computers a lot 
in her work 
5 counting on = depending on; counts 
for little = is of little value
UNIT 93
93. 1
2  there has been an improvement in her 
condition
3  takes (great / a lot of) pride in
4  give / offers / provides advice on
5  cruelty to
6  had a long / lengthy discussion about / 
on
7  have a vaccination against typhoid / 
have a typhoid vaccination
8  had a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on
9  There is a lack of affordable housing 
in the city. / The city has a lack of 
affordable housing.
10  a ban on ﬁreworks
93.2
2 sign of stopping
3 decision to allow
4 reason to worry
5 risk of transmitting
6 ability to remember 
7 failure to protect 
8 cost of buying 
275
Key to Exercises
9 possibility of getting 
10 unwillingness to acknowledge
93.3 
Likely verbs are given
2 of seeing
3 to take
4 to retire / of retiring 
5 of taking / to take
6 of dancing
UNIT 94
94. 1
1 intransitive; no noun / pronoun needed
2 … look it up … (a noun or pronoun is 
necessary)
3 … help (you) out … (a noun or 
pronoun is possible) 
4 … tidy (things) up … (a noun or 
pronoun is possible)
5 intransitive; no noun / pronoun needed
94.2
1  out 
2  about 
3 up 
4  out 
5  up 
6  away
94.3
2 left her name out / left out her name
3 shut the thing up
4 make my mind up / make up my mind
5 got down the general ideas / got the 
general ideas down
6 hear me out
94.4
1   ordering about everyone  ordering 
everyone about
2   provide their children for  provide for 
their children
3   let in me on the secret  let me in on 
the secret 
4   called motorists on  called on 
motorists 
5 ✓
6   took up Emre on  took Emre up on
7 ✓
8 ✓
9   looked Mr Gao up to  looked up to Mr 
Gao 
UNIT 95
95. 1
3 Is there something bothering you? 
4 There was a barrier across the road. 
6 There remains the problem of what to 
do with nuclear waste. 
8 There is supposed to be a video on the 
website, but it doesn’t work.
9 There was no petrol available 
anywhere in the city.
10 Is there anyone who / that can help 
me?
11 There are some general rules (which / 
that) you can follow.
12 There used to be an art gallery around 
here. 
(Sentences with ‘There …’ are unlikely in 
2, 5, and 7 because the subjects have a 
deﬁnite or speciﬁc meaning, indicated by 
‘Your’, ‘The’, and ‘My’.)
95.2
1 are
2 are
3 is
4 is
5 are
6 is
7 are
8 is
95.3 
The most likely sentences are given.
2 + c   There’s a cake in the kitchen (that 
/ which) I’ve made especially for your 
birthday. 
3 + h   There was never any doubt (that) 
Bruno would get the job. 
4 + a   There have been suggestions (that) 
an election will be held next month. 
5 + f   There aren’t many people alive today 
who / that haven’t watched TV.
6 + g   There are still some old houses in 
the village that / which don’t have 
electricity.
7 + d   There was absolutely nothing (that) 
I could do to prevent him falling.
8 + b   There are few people in the 
company who / that are harder-
working than Kristin.
95.4
2 There being no further business, the 
meeting closed at 12:30.
3 There being no doctor available, the 
patients were sent home.
4 There being inadequate facilities at the 
hotel, the conference was relocated to 
a nearby university.
UNIT 96
96. 1
2 It was unsettling how he stared 
straight at me. 
3 ✗ (However, in spoken English 
we might say ‘It was surprising, 
Francesco’s excellent exam result’.)
4 It is an advantage in the job to be a 
qualiﬁed driver. 
5 ✗ (However, in spoken English we 
might say ‘It’s quite radical, her 
proposal’.) 
6 It is highly unusual to put carpet on 
walls. 
7 ✗ (However, in spoken English we 
might say ‘It’s a Ferrari, Robin’s new 
car’.)
8 It is hard ﬁnding a good plumber these 
days. (or It is hard to ﬁnd …)
96.2 
The most likely answers are given
2 … it astonished me to discover (that) 
she was also a successful novelist. 
3 … it hurts (me) to pedal my bicycle. / 
… it has hurt (me) to pedal my bicycle. 
4 … it struck me (that) he was jealous. 
5 … it concerned me to hear (that) he 
was offended. (or … it upset me …)
6 … it didn’t bother him (that) everyone 
could see in. 
7 … it upset me (that) she hadn’t even 
told me when she was going away. (or 
… it concerned me …)
8 … it doesn’t do to criticise them too 
much. 
9 … it scared me to see (that) they were 
carrying knives. 
10 … it pays to plan your journey ahead.
96.3
Example answers are given
2 It takes a lot of hard work to build your 
own house. 
3 It takes a considerable amount of 
courage to make a speech in front of a 
group of strangers.
4 It takes patience and a lot of time to 
explain the rules of cricket to someone 
who doesn’t know the game.
5 It takes bravery to stand up to a bully. 
6 It takes a lot of organisation to be a 
good administrator.
7 It takes a great deal of time to learn to 
speak a foreign language well.
UNIT 97
97.1
2 ﬁnd it
3 discover (‘ﬁnd’ would also be possible) 
4 owe it
5 remember 
6 enjoy it
7 prefer it 
8 leave it 
9 predict 
10 consider it
97.2
2 I see it as part of my role to 
signiﬁcantly reduce Rexco’s carbon 
footprint  in / over the next ﬁve years.
3 I accept it as a necessary evil that 
some people may be made redundant 
in the next year. 
4 I view it as important for relations 
with the workforce to make available 
information about / on managers’ 
salaries.  
5 I regard it as unacceptable for a 
modern company to exclude the 
workforce from major decision making.
276
Key to Exercises
6 I take it as a fundamental principle 
of the company that suppliers of raw 
materials should be given a fair price 
for their products.
97.3
2 there’s no hope / chance 
3 It’s no secret
4 It’s no good / use or There’s no point
5 there’s no reason 
6 there’s no alternative / choice 
7 It’s no longer
8 there’s no denying / question
UNIT 98
98. 1
2 … it was to cheer her up that I booked 
a holiday in Amsterdam. 
3 … it’s because I’ve got so much work 
to do that I can’t come. 
4 … it was somewhere in there that / 
where I lost it. 
5 … it was only by studying very hard 
that she improved her Spanish. 
6 … it is to my family that I dedicate this 
thesis.
98.2
2 No, what I hope is that they will be put 
into a public art gallery. 
3 No, what annoyed me was that she 
didn’t apologise. 
4 No, what I meant was that she could 
borrow it until I needed it again.
6 No, what I did was (to) put some oil 
and soy sauce on it and grill it. 
7 No, what I did was (to) give her some 
money towards it.
8 No, what I did was (to) hire a car and 
drive all the way. 
98.3 
Suggested answers
2 I don’t know if she’s free, but 
somebody who / that might be able 
to help is Petra. (or … but Petra is 
somebody who / that might be able to 
help.)
3 In fact the place where / that I grew up 
is between this village and the next. (or 
… the place that I grew up in …)
4 I suppose the time when I lived in 
Australia was when I was happiest.
UNIT 99
99. 1
1 (in a narrative ‘down comes’ is also 
possible; see Unit 2)
2 along comes
3 up go 
4 back / away / off he went
5 out / in came ( or comes)
6 along / up came ( or comes)
7 off / away she went ( or goes)
99.2
2 + h   Should you not wish to receive 
further information about our 
products, click on the box below. 
3 + a   Were the plane ever (to be) built, it 
would cut the journey time from New 
York to Tokyo by four hours. 
4 + g   Should the ice hockey team win 
again today, it will be their tenth 
consecutive victory.
5 + d   Were I (to be) offered the job, I 
would have no hesitation in accepting. 
6 + i   Had a car been coming the other 
way, I might have been seriously 
injured. 
7 + f   Had there been a referendum 
on the issue, it is unlikely that the 
electorate would have supported the 
government.
8 + b   Should you not be able to afford 
the SXL3, there are less expensive 
models in the range. 
9 + e   Were Charles Dickens (to be) alive 
today, he would be writing novels 
about the homeless in London.
99.3 
Example sentences
(i)
Europeans spend less of their income on 
recreation today than do Americans.
Americans spent less of their income on 
housing in 1970 than did Europeans. 
(ii)  
Europeans spent less of their income on 
recreation than on housing in 1970, as is 
the case today. 
Americans spend more of their income on 
food and drink than on recreation today, 
as was the case in 1970. 
99.4
2 Kamal went to Oxford University, as 
did his sister. 
3 People in poorer countries consume 
a far smaller proportion of the earth’s 
resources than do those in developed 
nations. 
4 He is a much better teacher now than 
he was ﬁ ve years ago. (no inversion 
with a pronoun as subject)
5 Dan is a keen golfer, as is his wife.
UNIT 100
100. 1
2 At no time was the public (ever) in any 
danger. 
3 Only with close friends and family did 
he feel entirely relaxed. 
4 Only if the pitch is frozen will the 
match be cancelled. 
5 Little did I know then that Carmen and 
I would be married one day. 
6 Barely had he entered the water when 
it became clear he couldn’t swim. 
7 On no account are you to light the ﬁ  re 
if you are alone in the house. / On no 
account should / must you …
8 Not for one moment was there any 
rivalry between the three brothers. 
9 Not only was I wet through, I was 
freezing cold.
10 Only once had I ever climbed this high 
before. / Only once before had I ever 
climbed this high.
11 Hardly had the audience taken their 
seats when the conductor stepped 
onto the stage. 
12 Only in the last few years has he been 
acknowledged to be a great author.
100.2
Possible answers
2 … was the strength of the earthquake 
…
3 … is her dominance in the sport …
4 … alike were the twins …
5 … complicated was the equation …
6 … boring was the lesson …
100.3
Corrections are given in the underlined 
sections
The people of Sawston were evacuated 
yesterday as forest ﬁ res headed towards 
the town. Such was the heat of the 
oncoming inferno that trees more than 
100 metres ahead began to smoulder. 
Only once in recent years, during 2004, 
has a town of this size (inversion is likely in 
this written context) had to be evacuated 
because of forest ﬁ res. A ﬂ eet of coaches 
and lorries arrived in the town in the early 
morning. Into these vehicles climbed the 
sick and elderly (inversion is likely in this 
written context), before they headed off 
to safety across the river. Residents with 
cars left by mid morning, as did all non-
essential police ofﬁ cers.
Hardly had the evacuation been 
completed when the wind changed 
direction and it became clear that the ﬁ re 
would leave Sawston untouched. Soon 
after that complaints were heard from 
some residents. ‘At no time did the ﬁ res 
pose a real threat,’ said one local man. ‘I 
didn’t want to leave my home, and nor 
did most of my neighbours.’ So upset 
are some elderly residents that they are 
threatening to complain to their MP. But 
Chief Fire Ofﬁ cer Jones replied, ‘Had we 
not taken this action, lives would have 
been put at risk. Only when the ﬁ res have 
moved well away from the town will 
residents be allowed to return to their 
homes.’
277
Key to Exercises
Key to Study planner
Tenses
1.1 B
1.2 D
1.3 C
1.4 A, B
1.5 C
1.6 A
1.7 D
1.8 B
1.9 A, C
1.10 C
1.11 A
1.12 B
1.13 B, D
1.14 C
1.15 B, C
The future
2.1 C
2.2 D
2.3 B, D
2.4 A, D
2.5 C
2.6 B
2.7 A
2.8 D
2.9 B, C
2.10 C, D
2.11 C
Modals and semi-modals
3.1 C
3.2 B
3.3 A
3.4 D
3.5 C, D
3.6 B, D
3.7 B
3.8 C
3.9 A, C
3.10 B, C
3.11 D
3.12 A
Linking verbs, passives, 
questions
4.1 C, D
4.2 B
4.3 A, C
4.4 B, C
4.5 B
4.6 C
4.7 A, D
4.8 D
4.9 B
4.10 C
Verb complementation: what 
follows verbs
5.1 D
5.2 A, B
5.3 C
5.4 B
5.5 C, D
5.6 A
5.7 A
Reporting
6.1 C
6.2 A
6.3 D
6.4 B
6.5 B, D
6.6 A
6.7 C
6.8 B, D
6.9 B, C
6.10 A, C
Nouns
7 .1 B
7 .2 B, D
7 .3 C
7 .4 A, D
7 .5 A, C
7 .6 B, D
7 .7 A, D
7 .8 D
7 .9 A
Articles, determiners and 
quantiﬁ ers
8.1 B
8.2 C
8.3 A
8.4 B
8.5 A, D
8.6 C
8.7 D
8.8 A, C
8.9 B
8.10 B, D
8.11 A
8.12 C
8.13 D
8.14 B
8.15 A, C
8.16 A
8.17 B
8.18 B
8.19 D
8.20 B
Relative clauses and other 
types of clause
9.1 D
9.2 A, B
9.3 B, C, D
9.4 B
9.5 C, D
9.6 A, C
9.7 A
9.8 B
9.9 C
9.10 B
Pronouns, substitution and 
leaving out words
10.1 D
10.2 B, D
10.3 C, D
10.4 A, B
10.5 C, D
10.6 B
10.7 C, D
10.8 D
10.9 A, B, D
10.10 A
Adjectives and adverbs
11.1 B
11.2 B, C
11.3 A, C
11.4 D
11.5 C
11.6 A
11.7 A, C, D
11.8 B
11.9 C
11.10 B (in informal speech only), C, D
11.11 A
11.12 A (in informal speech only), B, C
11.13 D
11.14 A, B
11.15 C
11.16 A, C
11.17 A, D
11.18 B, C
Adverbial clauses and 
conjunctions
12.1 B
12.2 A
12.3 A
12.4 C, D
12.5 A, D
12.6 B, C
12.7 A, D
12.8 B, D
12.9 C
12.10 C, D
12.11 B
12.12 A, D
12.13 A, B, C
12.14 A
Prepositions
13.1 A
13.2 D
13.3 A, B
13.4 A, D
13.5 B, C
13.6 A
13.7 C
Organising information
14.1 B
14.2 C
14.3 B
14.4 B, D
14.5 A
14.6 B, C
277
278
Appendix 1
Regular and irregular verbs
Key to Additional exercises
1
1 b  ’m not promising / don’t promise / 
didn’t promise
2 a was reading / read
 b read
3 a were expecting / expected
 b are expecting / expect
4 a owns (or ‘own’)
 b owned / owns
5 a  ’m considering / was considering / 
considered
 b consider
6 a tells / told
 b tell / told
7 a phoned
 b was phoning / phoned
8 a ’s always putting / puts
 b ’s constantly putting / puts
9 a prefer
 b preferred
10 a weighs 
 b was weighing
2
1 a + (i) or (ii) b + (ii)
2 a + (ii) b + (i)
3 a + (i) or (ii) b + (i)
4 a + (ii) b + (i)
5 a + (i) or (ii) b + (ii)
6 a + (i) b + (ii)
7 a + (i) b + (ii)
8 a + (ii)  
 b  + (i) (b + (ii) is also correct 
grammatically, but it is unlikely to 
be used; it suggests that it is difﬁ cult 
to get good pasta in Italy, which is, 
of course, not the case!)
3
1 ‘had discussed’ is also possible, but less 
likely as the duration of the discussions 
is emphasised
2 His condition had improved 
considerably when I saw him in 
hospital last night. (‘improved’ would 
be unlikely as it would suggest that his 
condition improved because I saw him 
last night)
3 It was announced that the Toulouse 
train had been delayed by ten minutes. 
(‘was delayed’ is also possible with a 
similar meaning)
4 Thomas had been dieting for a month 
when he came to stay with us, and 
we noticed immediately that he had 
already lost a lot of weight.
5 Victoria had been expected to win 
comfortably, but she ﬁ nished third. 
(‘was expected’ is also possible with a 
similar meaning)
6 When I reversed the car out of the 
garage, I damaged the rear number 
plate.
7 Andrei was promoted last week.
8 The tax authorities had been 
investigating Rentpool for a number 
of months when they arrested the 
chairman. (‘had investigated’ is also 
possible, but less likely as the duration 
of the investigation is emphasised)
9 The Minister angered her colleagues 
when she criticised them during her 
speech yesterday.
10 Emilia had already suggested that 
the money should be spent on new 
tablet computers for the school.
4
A
1 ✓ (‘you’ll’ is also possible)
2 I’ll (= ‘I will’ or ‘I shall’)
B
1 I’m going to build / I’m building
2 I’ll give
C
1 Will / Are you going to be able to /Are 
you able to
2 we’re going to have / we’re having
3 I’ll
4 ✓
D
1 is going (more likely than ‘is going to 
go’)
2 isn’t (is not) coming / isn’t (is not) 
going to come / won’t come
3 we’ll see / we’re going to see
4 ✓
E
1 I’m taking / I’m going to take / I’ll take
2 ✓
3 more likely is ‘It’s at 4:15’ as this is part 
of a timetable
4 It’ll take
5 ‘we’re going to have’ is more likely
6 ‘I’ll stay’ is more likely if the decision is 
made at the moment of speaking
5
1 ought to have asked; would have been
2 should; ’d better
3 won’t; can’t; used to
4 can’t; must have
5 mustn’t; can
6 wouldn’t; needn’t have worried
7 should; would
8 should; may
9 must; could
10 will be able to; might
11 couldn’t; didn’t have to
12 don’t need to; can
6
The agent (after ‘by …’) is given only 
where it is likely to be included. Where it 
might either be included or left out, it is 
written in brackets.
A The Prime Minister is being 
encouraged to sack the Environment 
Minister, Maria Long, after it was 
revealed that she had received 
payments from a major oil company. 
However, in a statement today, the 
Prime Minister said: ‘I am told (by 
my advisors) / I am advised that Mrs 
Long was paid the money (by the 
company) [Note the word order: not ‘… 
by the company the money …’] before 
she joined the government. I have no 
intention of dismissing her.’
B A tropical storm has caused severe 
ﬂ ooding in the city of Chittagong 
in southern Bangladesh. Although 
there are understood to be (or it is 
understood that there are / have 
been) no casualties, many thousands 
of people have been made homeless 
(by the ﬂ oods), and the damage to 
property is estimated as running into 
millions of dollars.
C Protesters have continued to block 
the construction of the new ring road 
by tying themselves to trees along 
the proposed route. (Police say that) 
The protesters have been given two 
days to leave the area or they will be 
arrested (by the police).
D Conservation groups have demanded 
that the nuclear power station should 
be closed down (by the government) 
after a report which said that 
unacceptable levels of radiation have 
been found (by investigators) in the 
local area.
E The Commissioner of the Dublin 
police force has revealed that a death 
threat has been received (by the 
police) against the life of President 
Nabon, who is visiting the capital this 
weekend. He says that the threat 
is being taken very seriously. It is 
expected that security levels will be 
increased during the President’s visit.
F A man was found injured on a Scottish 
hillside this morning. It is thought 
that he fell while coming down a 
hillside in bad weather. He is being 
treated in hospital for leg and head 
injuries. [We can assume that medical 
staff would treat him in hospital, so 
there is no need to mention the agent 
here.] He was reported missing last 
279
Key to Exercises
night when he failed to return home 
after a day’s walking.
G And now football. There are expected 
to be (or It is expected that there 
will be) a record crowd at tonight’s 
match between Barcelona and Real 
Madrid. It is reported that the 
Barcelona players will be given a 
huge ﬁ nancial bonus (by the club) 
if they win and it has even been 
suggested that they might be paid as 
much as €50,000 each (by the club).
7
1 on paying
2 by asking
3 his saying / him saying
4 appointed
5 count
6 at me to tidy
7 to visit
8 wearing children’s clothes / children’s 
clothes
9 their cat
10 forcing
11 her wearing / wearing
12 to appear
13 let
14 to hearing
15 entitle her to
16 waited for
17 noticed a man take
18 invited
19 tell / telling
20 looking
21 talked
22 to living
23 me from using
8
2 We were disappointed with Karen’s 
decision not to go to university next 
year. / … Karen’s decision that she 
wouldn’t go / wasn’t going / isn’t 
going to university next year.
3 Considerable media attention has 
been focused on Professor Adams’s 
prediction that the Earth will / would 
pass through the tail of a comet within 
the next ﬁ ve years.
4 The company has carried out its 
threat to dismiss the strikers / … that 
it would dismiss the strikers (if they 
didn’t return to work).
5 Nicky decided to follow her boss’s 
advice that she should delegate more 
of her work to her secretary. / … her 
boss’s advice to delegate more of her 
work to her secretary.
6 Jason didn’t turn up until eleven, 
despite his promise to pick me up at 
ten. / … his promise that he would 
pick me up at ten.
7 I wasn’t surprised by Rob’s conclusion 
that Professor Jones doesn’t know 
what he is talking about. / … Rob’s 
conclusion that Professor Jones didn’t 
know what he was talking about.
8 We decided to ignore Dan’s complaint 
that his dinner was cold.
9 I was astonished by their refusal to 
negotiate over the ownership of the 
land.
10 The Health Minister has issued a 
warning to keep small children indoors 
until pollution levels have decreased. 
/ … a warning that small children 
should be kept indoors until pollution 
levels have decreased.
11 I was surprised by her confession that 
she has / had never used a computer 
before.
12 When I asked Zeb where Bethany was, 
his reply was that he didn’t know.
9
1 wants
2 are
3 live
4 points
5 prefer / prefers
6 love / loves (although a plural verb is 
more grammatical)
7 claim
8 go
9 comes
10 is / are
11 is / are
12 shuts
13 suspect
14 are
15 appears
16 are
17 is / are (although a plural is preferred 
in formal contexts)
18 plan / plans
19 is
20 provides (more likely than ‘provide’ in 
this formal context)
21 get / gets
22 is
23 speak / speaks
24 has / have
25 are
26 have
27 has
28 isn’t
29 are
30 is
10
1 a  a /one (informally, we could also 
say ‘… for the week’);
 b a / one;
 c  one (‘one’ can complete all three 
sentences)
2 a A / The; b  a; c  an (a / an)
3 a the / –; b  the; c  The (the)
4 a the / –; b  some / –; c  – (–)
5 a the / –; b  some / –; 
 c some / – (–)
6 a – / Some; b  –; c  – (–)
7 a The / An; b  the; c  the (the)
8 a The / A; 
 b  a / one (informally, we could also 
say ‘… for the night …’); 
 c a (a)
9 a the / –; b  –; c  – (–)
10 a a / –; b  a; c  a (a)
11
2 Carla’s restaurant, which serves a 
range of Mediterranean dishes, is very 
good value. (some people would use 
‘that’ as an alternative to ‘which’)
3 The New Zealand rugby team, all of 
whose members weigh over 100 kilos, 
are clear favourites to win the match.
4 Chloe brought home a kitten (which / 
that) she’d found in the park.
5 The story is about a teenage boy 
whose ambition is to become an 
astronaut.
6 Paul has got a job with Empirico, 
whose main product is electric light 
bulbs.
7 Politicians should give more 
consideration to the working people 
(who / that / whom) they represent.
8 Among the group of people was 
Professor Fischer, who / whom I had 
last seen in Munich 20 years earlier.
9 I live on a small road which / that leads 
down to the river.
10 Monet’s earlier paintings, many of 
which have never been seen in the USA 
before, are in a new exhibition in New 
York.
11 Ian McIver, whose ﬁ  rst job was selling 
vegetables in a market, has become 
managing director of Europe’s largest 
food retailer.
12 Kaspar has a new girlfriend who / that 
works in the library.
13 My Volkswagen Golf, which I bought 
in 2006, is a very reliable car. (some 
people would use ‘that’ as an 
alternative to ‘which’)
14 Bronwen Brookes, after whom the 
Brookes art gallery is named, will 
be present at its ofﬁ cial opening. / 
Bronwen Brookes, who(m) the Brookes 
gallery is named after, will …
12
1 did
2 doing so / so doing
3 promised he would
4 appears so
5 do
279
Key to Additional exercises
280
Key to Additional exercises
6 have / have done
7 didn’t want to
8 do (‘do so’ is unlikely in this informal 
context)
9 doubt that he will
10 don’t suppose so / suppose not 
11  want to / want
12 has
13 such a dilemma
14 do
15 afford to
16 expect so
17 suspect not
18 hope not
19 might have / might
20 told me so
21 determined to / determined
22 to be
23 guess not
24 might do / might be
13
Suggested improvements are given
a Every so often I leave work early (✓) 
(or I leave work early every so often) 
and go to a performance in the local 
concert hall. It’s very close to my ofﬁce 
in the building opposite. Usually (✓) 
they are rather good, but yesterday’s, 
given by a singer and pianist, was a 
total (✓) disaster. The singer began to 
sing with wonderful control. But when 
the pianist started to play, it sounded 
awful. At ﬁrst I thought he was playing 
badly, but then it became obvious 
that the piano was completely out 
of tune. They stopped and discussed 
the problem brieﬂy (or … and brieﬂy 
discussed the problem). Clearly, they 
couldn’t continue (or They clearly 
couldn’t continue), and they left the 
stage unhappily (✓). Naturally (✓), 
all the people present felt sorry for 
them. I’m sure the person responsible 
for tuning the piano will be severely 
reprimanded.
b I was just going out to work this 
morning when the postman pushed a 
letter through my letterbox. It was from 
Mara, who writes from time to time (✓). 
The letter said that she has to come to 
Bristol to visit her uncle, who is unwell. 
She is one of his few remaining (✓) 
relatives. She wants us to meet and 
asked if I could suggest a possible time. 
Well, I haven’t seen her for a couple of 
years, so I was really pleased. We ﬁrst 
(✓) met at university. We have similar 
interests (or Our interests are alike), so 
we always ﬁnd a lot to talk about. The 
photos included in the letter showed 
that she hadn’t changed since I last 
(✓) saw her. I spent so long reading the 
letter that I was nearly late for work.
14
3 + b   Johan must weigh over 120 kilos, 
whereas his wife is really small. / 
Whereas Johan must weigh over 120 
kilos, his wife is really small. / His wife 
is really small, whereas Johan must 
weigh over 120 kilos. / Whereas his 
wife is really small, Johan must weigh 
over 120 kilos.
4 + j   There had been a lot of publicity 
about the meeting. Even so, only 
about 100 people attended.
5 + e   I can’t afford a coat like that. 
Besides, I don’t like the style.
6 + h   I’m determined to ﬁnish the report 
tonight, even if I have to stay at work 
until midnight. / Even if I have to stay 
at work until midnight I’m determined 
to ﬁnish the report.
7 + g   Make sure you catch the last bus at 
11:00. Otherwise, you’ll have to walk 
all the way from the station.
8 + a   Although I found the ﬁlm boring, I 
stayed until the end. / I found the ﬁlm 
boring, although I stayed until the end.
9 + i   She hid the letter between the 
pages of a book so that her husband 
would never ﬁnd it. / So that her 
husband would never ﬁnd it, she hid 
the letter between the pages of a 
book.
10 + c   In order to prepare for the 
marathon, I’ve been running about 
200 kilometres a week. / I’ve been 
running about 200 kilometres a week 
in order to prepare for the marathon.
15
1 … although I know that you approve 
of it.
2 There seems to be little likelihood 
of Williamson winning Wimbledon 
because of her inability to play well on 
grass tennis courts.
3 Our plan is to split the organisation up 
into a number of small units. (or ‘split 
up the organisation into’. Note that 
‘split the organisation into’ [without 
‘up’] is also possible.) This will improve 
our prospects of competing with more 
specialised companies.
4 I ran into / across Danny in town the 
other day. He asked for your email 
address, so he’ll probably by in touch 
with you.
5 Jack takes great pride in never 
throwing anything away (‘throwing 
away anything’ is also possible, but 
less likely).
6 Although Professor Martinez knows a 
great deal about meteorology, even he 
can’t account for the unusual weather 
we have been having over the last few 
weeks.
7 There has been a great improvement 
in the behaviour of children in the 
school. This has resulted from the 
headteacher’s idea of involving them 
in decision-making.
8 Even though Charlotte didn’t act 
on my advice and follow a career in 
medicine, I’m full of admiration for her 
determination to train to be a vet.
16
2 Only if an ofﬁcial complaint is made 
will the police investigate the matter 
further.
3 So complicated were the instructions, 
…
4 Had we known how ill Rob was, …
5 Such was the strength of the wind that 
… (or So strong was the wind that …)
6 Seldom did she regret her lack of 
formal education, …
7 Only in an emergency should you 
phone for an ambulance. (or Only 
if there is an emergency should you 
phone for an ambulance.)
8 Not for one moment was there any / a 
disagreement between us.
9 Were it not for ﬁnancial assistance 
from the government, …
10 Hardly had they ﬁnished eating before 
a waiter started to clear away the 
plates.
11 Under no circumstances should 
children be allowed into the room 
without adult supervision.
12 Should the bridge ever be built, …
281
advice  40,  78
afﬁrmative sentences  205, 207
agent  205
 see also  passive forms
agreement, subject and verb
 clause, as subject 80
 co-ordinated nouns / phrases, as 
subject 82
 collective nouns 80
 complex subject 80
 determiners 82
 how / here / there + be / have  82
 items joined by (either) ... or 
or(neither) ... nor 82
 measurement / amount / quantity, 
with singular verb 84
 names / titles ending in -s 80
 nouns ending in -s 84
 subject, position of 80
 there + be / have  82
 what-clause , as subject 80
all (of), whole, every, each
 time expressions  102
 whole / entire , before nouns  102
among and between  178
amounts  104
any see some and any
apostrophe, for possessives  231
 articles
 additional exercise  246–47
 deﬁnition of  205
 grammar reminder  232
 study planner  210
 see also  a / an, the, and zero article
 auxiliary verbs  205
 in inversion  198
 leaving words out after  128
  b e  as main verb in previous clause / 
sentence  128
  have  as auxiliary + done  128
  modal auxiliary + do / be  128
  more than one auxiliary  128
  no auxiliary  128
  substitute do  128
 negative questions 54, 227
 substitute so and not  124
 see also  modal verbs
B
bare inﬁnitive  206
being + past participle clause  206
between and among  178
C
can see ability; permission; possibility
change, process of  42
‘choosing’ verbs  68
classifying adjectives  132, 134, 136, 205
clauses
 deﬁnition of  206
 study planner  217
 types of  206
cleft sentences  196, 206
 it + make + adjective (+ to-inﬁnitive 
/ -ing /  that-clause)  140
 position of
  additional exercise  248
  before / after noun  132
  classifying adjectives  132
  emphasising adjectives  132
  grammar review  237
  with linking verbs  132
  qualitative adjectives  132
  reduced relative clauses  132
  study planner  218–19
  types of  205
 see also  comparative forms; compound 
adjectives; participle adjectives; 
superlative forms
adverbial clauses
 additional exercise  249
 contrasts  164
 deﬁnition of  205
 study planner  219–220
 tenses in  238
 of time  158
adverbial phrases, as complement  206
adverbials
 adverb as  205
 adverbial clause as  205
 deﬁnition of  205
 inversion after negative  200
 noun phrase as  205
 participle clauses  116, 118
 prepositional phrase as  205
adverbs
 and adjectives, use of  237
 deﬁnition of  205
 formation of  142
 participle adjectives in -ed,
  adverbial form of  142
 particles  207
 phrasal verbs  207
 position of
  additional exercise  248
  after object  148
  comment adverbs  150, 156
  connecting adverbs  150
  degree adverbs  150, 154
  focus adverbs  154
  frequency adverbs  148, 150, 152
  long adverbials  148, 150
  and meaning  148
  more than one adverbial  148
  order of events  150
  place and direction adverbs  150, 152
  time adverbs  150, 152
  viewpoint adverbs  150, 156
 prepositional phrases, adverbial use of  
142
 study planner  218–19
 types of  205
 with and without -ly  142
 see also  comparative forms; superlative 
forms
A
a / an, the, and zero article
 generalisations about classes of things 
90
 geographical areas 90
 holidays, seasons, days of the week, 
and festivals 94
 jobs / job titles 92
 means of transport and 
communication 94
 names of people 92
 nouns both countable and
 uncountable 90
 speciﬁc versus general 94
 with superlative adjectives 92
 with there + be  190
 things that are unique 90
 this , in stories and jokes 92
 times of day and night 94
a / an and one
  abbreviations 88
 in number / quantity expressions 88
 one ...other / another  pattern 88
 particular, but unspeciﬁed person / 
thing / event 88
 with possessives 88
 before singular countable nouns 88
 before vowels / consonants 88
abbreviations 88
ability
 be able to   30
 can / could   30, 34, 224, 225
academic writing
 few  and little  104
 may   34
 much (of) , many (of)  100
 prepositional phrases  114
 such that , to introduce a result  162
 active ( versus passive) forms  44, 46, 
48, 204, 205
adding information conjunctions  174
 noun phrases  112, 114
 prepositional phrases  114
 sentence connectors  174
adjectives
 and adverbs, use of  142, 237
 deﬁnition of  205
 easily confused  237
 gradable and non-gradable  134
 both senses  136
 classifying adjectives  136
 different senses  136
 good and / lovely and / nice and ... + 
gradable adjective  136
 grammar review  237
 more and more + adjective   136
 qualitative adjectives  136
 patterns after linking verbs
 adjective + -ing / that-clause /  to-
inﬁnitive / wh-clause  140
 it + linking verb + adjective (+ to-
inﬁnitive)  140
Index of grammatical items
282
Index of grammatical items
 study planner  215–16
direct object 58, 207
 see also  complement; object; 
transitive / intransitive verbs; verb 
complementation
direct speech  206
direction adverbs  150, 152, 198, 205
disapproval  168
‘disliking’ verbs  60
distance  104
do, after negative adverbials  200
 see also  auxiliary verbs;
 substitution
-ed clauses see past participle
E
each see all (of), whole, every, each
echo questions 54, 208
emphasising adjectives  132, 205
every see all (of), whole, every, each
exceptions  182
expectations  40
festivals 94
F
few, little, less, and fewer
 (a) few , (a) little, as pronouns  104
 the few , the little + noun, as ‘not 
enough’  104
 few  + personal pronouns  104
 few  and little, as informal alternatives  
104
 less (than)  and fewer (than)  104
 a little , as informal alternative  104
 what few / what little , as ‘the small 
(number / amount)’  104
fewer see few, little, less, and fewer
ﬁnite verbs  209
focus adverbs  154, 205
focusing
 fronting, for emphasis  198
 it-clauses   196
 wh-clauses   196
 what-clauses   196
frequency adverbs
 with have to  36
 indeﬁnite frequency  205
 past continuous with  4
 position of  148, 150, 152
 present continuous with  4
future continuous
 arranged events / activities  22
 grammar reminder  224
 imagining what is happening
  around now  22
 particular point in future, relating
  start of event to  22
 repeated / regular events  22
 willingness, avoiding  22
future events
 additional exercise  242
 be about to + inﬁnitive   24, 26
 be going to + inﬁnitive  20, 166, 223
 be to + inﬁnitive   24
 common phrases for talking about  26
conditional clauses
 deﬁnition of  206
 real and unreal conditions  206, 238–39
 real conditionals, tenses in  20, 166, 
168, 172, 239
 unreal conditionals, tenses in  166, 170, 
172, 239
conditional sentences  206
 conjunctions  174
 sentence connectors  174
conjunctions
 additional exercise  249
 conditions  174
 deﬁnition of  206
 noun phrases, adding information to  
112
 reasons and results  174
 study planner  219
 time  174, 238
connecting adverbs  150, 205 
contrasting
 although , though, while and whilst, 
with participle clauses  164
 although  and though  164
 conjunctions  174
 even though  and even if  164
 sentence connectors  174
 in spite of the fact that   164
 while / whereas   164
 while / whilst   164
could see ability; permission;
 possibility; reporting; unreal past 
countable / uncountable nouns
 deﬁnition of  206
 generalisations about classes of things 
90
 grammar reminder  230
 with there + be  190
 see also  a / an, the, and zero article; a 
/ an and one; agreement, subject and 
verb; all (of), whole, every, each; 
few, little, less, and fewer; much 
(of), many (of), a lot of, lots (of); 
one and ones; someand any
criticising  12
 might / could + have + past
 participle   34
 negative questions 54, 227
 will / would , use of  32
D
dash (–)  174
days of the week 94
deﬁning relative clauses  208
 see also  relative clauses
deﬁnite article  205
 see also  a / an, the, and zero article
degree adverbs  205
 much , very much  154
 with owing to  160
 position of  150, 154
 very , too  154
determiners  206
 grammar reminder  232–33
collective nouns 80, 207
colon  174, 230
colour adjectives  122
comma  230
comment adverbs  150, 156, 205
comparative forms  238
 adjectives with comparative /  
superlative meaning  144
 comparative adjectives, linking with 
and  136
 more  + one-syllable adjective  144
 more / less  + two-syllable adjectives  
144
 one-syllable adjectives and adverbs + 
-er  144
 phrases and clauses
  as + adjective + a / an + noun  146
  as + adjective / adverb as   146
  go so / as far as + to-inﬁnitive  146
  less + adjective + than   146
  as little / few as   146
  as much / many as   146
  not + adjective / adverb + enough 
+ to-inﬁnitive  146
  so + adjective / adverb + as + to-
inﬁnitive  146
  so + adjective / adverb + that-
clause  146
  sufﬁciently + adjective   146
  too + adjective + a / an + noun  146
  too + adjective / adverb + to-
inﬁnitive  146
 see also  few, little, less, and fewer
complaining  12
complement
 adverbial phrases as  206
 deﬁnition of  206
 and linking verbs  42, 206, 207
 and object  206
 prepositional phrase as  206
 and subject  206
 transitive / intransitive verbs 56
 see also  verb complementation
compound adjectives  138,  206
compound nouns
 countable compound nouns 86
 deﬁnition of  206
 grammar reminder  230
 hyphenated phrases, before nouns 86
 noun + noun  86
 noun + preposition + noun  86
 one word, separate words,
  hyphenated  230
 plural forms 86
 possessive forms 86
 two- and three-word verbs, nouns 
related to 86
conclusions, drawing
 grammar reminder  225–226
 must   36,  74
 present perfect continuous / present 
perfect  12
 will / would   32
283
Index of grammatical items
J
jobs / job titles 92
L
less see few, little, less, and fewer
linking verbs
 adjective patterns with  138, 140, 164
 become  and get  42
 ‘becoming’ verbs  42
 ‘being’ verbs  42
 and complement  42, 206, 207
 go  and turn  42
 ‘seeming’ verbs  42
 study planner  212–13
 superlatives  144
little see few, little, less, and fewer
M
main clauses
 deﬁnition of  206
 and relative clause  208
manner, adverbs of  148, 205
may see possibility
might see possibility; unreal past 
modal and semi-modal verbs
 additional exercise  242–43
 auxiliary verbs  205
 deﬁnition of  207
  grammar reminder  224–26
 with performatives  2
 reporting to reported clause, summary 
of changes  74
 study planner  212
much (of), many (of), a lot of, lots 
(of)  100
must
 drawing conclusions  36
 formal rules, regulations and warnings  
36
 and have (got) to  36, 225–26
 must / mustn’t , in reporting  74
 need(n’t) , don’t have to, mustn’t  
226
 proposing future arrangements  36
N
names, of people 80, 92
narrative  64
necessity  225–26
need
 in formal written English  38
 need(n’t) , don’t have to, mustn’t, 
don’t need to  38, 226
 as ordinary versus modal verb  38  
in questions  38
negative questions 54, 227
newspaper writing
 be to + inﬁnitive , for events likely to 
happen  24
 participle clauses, use of  112
 past perfect continuous, use of  14
no, none(of), and not any 98
nominal relative clauses  108, 208
 see also  relative clauses
non-afﬁrmative meaning  207
 whether ... or not   172
if-clauses 
 after would / would like  130
 future events  24
 inversion instead of  198
 should , were, had, and omission of if  
168
 without main clauses  168
 see also  conditional clauses imaginary 
situations  32, 239
imperative clauses  42, 166, 206
indeﬁnite article  205
 see also  a / an, the, and zero article
indirect object 58, 207
 see also  object; verb complementation
indirect questions  208
 see also  reporting
indirect speech  208
 see also  reporting
inﬁnitive forms  206
instructions  24, 166, 196
 grammar reminder  225
 if-clauses , without main clauses  168
intentions  26, 78
interrupted past actions / events 8 
intransitive verbs see transitive / 
intransitive verbs 
introducing new topic  196
inversion
 additional exercise  250
 adverbs of direction of movement  198
 after negative adverbials  200 
 after neither and nor  200
 after time adverbs  152
 fronting, for emphasis  198 
 with here comes, there goes  198 
 instead of if-clauses  198
 with so + adjective  200
 with such + be, for emphasis of extent 
/ degree  200
 with as and than, in comparisons  198
 of verb and subject  207
irregular verbs  202–3
it
 it is / was no  versus there is / was no  
194
 as object of verb  194
 reporting with passive forms 50 
 with viewpoint verbs  194
it, introductory
 to focus attention on sentence 
element  192
 it + be + adjective / noun   192
 it + verb + object + that-clause  192
 it + verb + object + to-inﬁnitive 
clause  192
 it + verb + that-clause   192
 it + verb + to-inﬁnitive clause   192
 not as alternative to noun as subject  
192
 where subject is to-inﬁnitive, that-
clause, wh-clause or -ing clause  
192
it-clauses  48, 196
 grammar reminder  223–24
 past and present continuous for 
intention 8
 possibility, can / could  30
 present continuous for  20
  grammar reminder  224
  informal arrangements  22 
 present simple for
  conditional clauses  20
  ﬁxed events  20
  grammar reminder  223
  if-clauses   24
  suppose / supposing / what if  ...  20
  time clauses  20
 real conditionals  166
 seen from the past
  be supposed to   28
  intentions  26
  reporting  28
  was / were to + inﬁnitive   28
  was / were to have + past
  participle   28
 shall / shan’t  versus will / won’t  26 
study planner  211
 verbs + to-inﬁnitive, for intentions  26
 will + inﬁnitive   223
 will  and be going to  18, 20
future perfect and future perfect 
continuous  22
 passive form  204
future simple  204
G
generalisations 90
geographical areas 90
glossary  205–09
going to see will and be going to
gradable adjectives  134, 136, 205, 237
grading adverbs  134, 205
H
have (got) to  36, 225–26
having + past participle (-ed) clause  
62, 116, 206
holidays 94
however  174
I
-ing (present participle) form 
 grammar reminder  235–36
 prepositional object  208
 reduced relative clauses  208
 see also  participle adjectives; verb 
complementation
if, in comparison clauses  168
if and whether 
 after certain verbs  172
 after preposition  172
 in clause acting as subject or 
complement  172
 noun + adjective + as to whether   
172
 possibilities, talking about  172
 reporting yes / no questions  64
 before to-inﬁnitive  172
284
Index of grammatical items
 intentions not carried out  10
 past perfect and past continuous
  activity in progress recently
  versus  ﬁnished  14
  number of times something 
happened  14
  particular past time, relating events 
to  14
  review of use of  16
  state verbs  14
past simple 
 grammar reminder  222
 passive form  204
 and past continuous  4, 8, 10, 16
 and past perfect  10, 16, 241–242
 and present perfect  6, 241
past subjunctive  209
 as it were   170
 unreal conditionals, were in if-clause  
170
 were , for imaginary situations  170
 were , in comparisons  170
perfect forms  16
performative verbs 
 deﬁnition of  207
 present simple  2
permission  34, 38, 224
 could , be allowed to  30
personal pronouns  208
persuading 54
phrasal verbs 
 deﬁnition of  207
 word order  188
 see also  two- and three-word verbs
place adverbs  205
possessive determiners  206
possessive nouns  207 , 231
possessive pronouns  207 , 231
possibility
 can  and could  30, 34
 grammar reminder  224
 may  and might  34, 225
predictions  18
preferences  170
prepositional objects 58, 208
prepositional phrases
 as complement  206
 deﬁnition of  208
prepositional verbs  208
 see also  phrasal verbs; two- and three-
word verbs
prepositions
 additional exercise  249
 after nouns  186
 after verbs  184
 deﬁnition of  207
 particles  207
 phrasal verbs  207
 of place  178
 of position and movement  176
 reasons, giving  160
 in relative clauses  110
 study planner  220–221
 of time  180
 with adverbial meaning  116
 contrasting  164
 deﬁnition of  206
 having + participle , and timing of 
action  116
 implied subject, and subject of main 
clause  116
 not , position of  116
 with own subject  116
 use of prepositions with  118 
participles  207
particles  188, 207
passive forms  204
 active patterns  44, 46
 additional exercise  243–44
 agent, omission of  48
 ‘appointing’ verbs  44
 ‘giving’ verbs  44
 grammar reminder  226–27
 it-clause  as subject of  48
 ‘liking / wanting’ verbs  46
 modal verbs  204
 ‘naming’ verbs  44
 reporting with 50
 study planner  212–13
 ‘telling’ verbs  44
 tenses  204
 topic emphasis  48
 transitive two- and three-word verbs  
44
 verbs with related nouns  48
past continuous
 with adverbs of frequency  4
 as / when / while   158
 grammar reminder  223
 passive form  204
 past perfect continuous, and past 
perfect  14
 and past simple 8, 16
  intentions not carried out 8, 10
  in narratives 8
  past events in succession 8
  past events over same period 8
  repeated past actions 8
past participle (-ed)  207
 grammar reminder  236
 reduced relative clause  208
 see also  participle adjectives; participle 
clauses
past perfect
 grammar reminder  223
 passive form  204
 past perfect continuous, and past 
continuous  14
 and past simple
  additional exercise  241–42
  intentions not carried out  10
  ordering past events  10
  reporting past events  10
  review of use of  16
 time clauses  6
past perfect continuous
 additional exercise  241–242
 grammar reminder  223
non-deﬁning relative clauses
 for adding information  106
 deﬁnition of  208
 participle clauses, use of instead of  112
 prepositional phrases  114
 whose , clauses with  108
 see also  relative clauses
non-ﬁnite verbs  209
non-gradable adjectives  134, 136, 205, 
237
non-grading adverbs  134, 205
noun phrases
 adding information to  112
  conjunctions  112
  namely , use of  112
  participle clauses  112
  prepositional phrases  114
  that is , use of  112
  to-inﬁnitive  clauses  112
 complements  42
 deﬁnition of  206
 nominal relative clauses  208
nouns 
 additional exercise  245–46
 deﬁnition of  207
 study planner  214
 see also  compound nouns;
 countable / uncountable nouns 
number expressions 88
O
object
 and complement  206
 deﬁnition of  207
 position of in two- and three-word 
verbs  188
 transitive verbs  209
 see also  transitive / intransitive verbs; 
verb complementation 
obligations  40, 226
offers  18, 72, 166, 225
one and ones
 with countable nouns  122
 inclusion of  122
 not used after nouns used as adjectives  
122
 omission of  122
 with possessive determiners  122
 referring to people  122
 see also  a / an and one
opinions  62
orders  24, 72, 78
organisations, names of 80
ought to see should and ought to
P
participle adjectives  207
 -ing  and -ed forms, as adjectives  138
 after nouns, reduced relatives  138
 in compound adjectives  138
 with much, very much  154
 position of  138
 that / those  before  138
participle clauses
 active and passive in noun phrases  112
285
Index of grammatical items
 when , whereby, where, why  108
 whose , clauses with  108
reported speech  208
reporting  64
 additional exercise  245
 grammar reminder  229
 modal auxiliaries  74
 negative forms  64
 offers / suggestions / orders / 
 intentions / requests  72
 passive forms  44
 punctuation for  229
 questions  64
 quotations  64
 study planner  214
 tense choice in  70
 that-clauses   66, 72, 76
 using adjectives  76
 using nouns  76
reporting / reported clauses  64, 72
 deﬁnition of  208
 past tenses  70
 present subjunctive  78
reporting verbs  64, 208
requests
 grammar reminder  225
 if-clauses   168
 reporting  72, 78
 will  and be going to  18
S
seasons 88, 94
semi-colon  174
semi-modal verbs  207
 grammar reminder  224–26
 see also  modal verbs
sense verbs  30
sentence connectors  174, 208
short answers  124
should and ought to
 be supposed to   226
 expectations  40
 had better , in spoken English  40
 obligations / recommendations  40
 questions / requests for conﬁrmation 
or advice  40
 regret / criticism  40
 should  and shall  40
simple versus continuous forms, 
summary of uses of  16
since and for  12, 14
some and any
 with before 96
 ‘approximately’ 96
 with comparisons 96
 general statements about whole 
classes of things 96
 grammar reminder  232–33
 with negative words 96
 non-afﬁrmative contexts 96
 non-speciﬁc, unspeciﬁed things 96
 before plural and uncountable nouns 
96
 strong and weak forms 96
Q
qualitative adjectives  132, 136, 205
quantiﬁers
 deﬁnition of  208
 grammar reminder  232–35 
 study planner  215–16
 with and without ‘of’  233–35
quantity expressions 84, 88
 see also  some and any 
question forms 
 grammar reminder  227
 indirect questions  208
 negative questions 54
 study planner  212–13
 with that-clauses 54
 types of  208
 see also  wh-questions; yes / no
questions
question tags  227
quotation marks  229
R
real conditionals
 if-clauses   166, 168
 real and unreal conditions  206, 238–39
 tenses in  20, 166, 168, 172, 239
 unless  and if not  172
reasons
 cleft sentences  196
 conjunctions  174
 prepositions  118, 160
 sentence connectors  174
reduced relative clauses  132, 138, 208
 see also  relative clauses
reﬂexive pronouns
 deﬁnition of  208
 for emphasis  120
 formality  120
 grammar reminder  236
 inclusion / omission of, with some 
verbs  120
 in verb + object + adjective 
complement structure 56
regret  170
relative clauses
 additional exercise  248
 deﬁning  106, 108, 112, 208
 deﬁnition of  208
 grammar reminder  235
 nominal  108, 208
 non-deﬁning  106, 108, 112, 114, 208
 prepositions in  110
 reduced  132, 138, 208
 study planner  217
relative pronouns
 deﬁnition of  208
 omission / inclusion of  106, 110, 190
 as subject / object of relative clause  
106
relative words  208
 a / the reason why / that   108
 nominal relative clauses, with who / 
what  108
 whatever , whoever, whichever  108
present and past time, review  16, 240
present continuous
 with adverbs of frequency  4
 for future events  20, 22, 224
 grammar reminder  222
 intentions  26
 passive form  204
 and present simple  2, 4, 16
present participle (-ing)  207
 see also  participle adjectives; participle 
clauses
present perfect
 grammar reminder  222–23
 passive form  204
 and past simple  6, 241
 and present perfect continuous  12, 16, 
241
 real conditionals  166
present perfect continuous 
 grammar reminder  223
 passive form  204
 and present perfect
  activities in progress until recently  12
  additional exercise  241
  conclusions from what can be seen / 
heard etc.  12
  recently completed events  12
  repeated versus one-off activities  12
  results of circumstances / activities  
12
  review of uses of  16
  situations existing until present  12
present simple
 contents of books / ﬁlms etc.  4
 for future events  20, 24, 166, 172, 224
 grammar reminder  222
 intentions  26
 newspaper headlines  4
 passive form  204
 phrases introducing news  4
 and present continuous  16
  immediacy  4
  life commentaries  4
  mental states  2
  performative verbs  2
  state verbs  2
 real conditionals  166
 time clauses  6
present subjunctive  78, 209
present tenses, in reporting and reported 
clauses  70
product names 92
promises  18
pronouns
 deﬁnition of  208
 study planner  217–18
 types of  208
purposes and results
 in order / so as + to-inﬁnitive   162
 in order that  and so that  162
 so + adjective / adverb + that-clause  
146
 such that , in such a way that, such … 
that  162
286
Index of grammatical items
W
wh-clauses 
 focusing  196
 with linking verbs  140
 verbs with  68
wh-questions 52, 208, 209
 auxiliary verb 54
 how  and what 52
 reporting  64
 with that-clauses 54
 what  52
 which  52
 who  52
 whom  52
 whose  52
 see also  negative questions
wh-words  208, 209
what-clauses 80, 196
whether see if and whether
whole see all (of), whole, every,
each
will, would and used to 
 characteristic behaviour / habits  32
 conclusions / assumptions  32
 criticism  32
 grammar reminder  225
 repeated events in past  32
 unreal past situations  32
will and be going to 
 be going to + go / come   20
 conditional sentences  18
 decisions  18
 formality / informality  18, 20
 offers / requests / promises  18
 planned / likely events  18, 20
 predictions  18
willingness  22
works of art 92
would see if-clauses; will, would and 
used to
Y
yes / no questions  64, 208
 see also question forms
Z
zero article  205
 see also  a / an, the, and zero article
times, of day and night 94
titles, of newspapers, books, ﬁlms 80
to-inﬁnitive
 with come and grow  42
 deﬁnition of  206
 leaving out  130
 with linking verbs  140
 noun phrases, adding information to  
112
 see also  verb complementation 
transitive / intransitive verbs 56
 grammar reminder  228
 implied object 56
 intransitive verbs 56, 206
 passives, grammar reminder  226–27
 transitive or intransitive verbs 56
 transitive verbs 56, 209
 two- and three-word verbs, word order  
188
 see also  verb complementation 
two- and three-word verbs 
 deﬁnition of  209
 particle in  207
 position of prepositions in  110
 word order  188
U
uncertainty  76
unchanging states  12
uncountable nouns see
countable / uncountable nouns
 unless and if not  172
unreal conditionals
 but for   166
 if + past simple   166
 real and unreal conditions  206, 238–39
 unless  and if not  172
 were  in if-clause  166, 170
unreal past 
 might / could have + past participle  
239
 would have + past participle   32, 239
used to 
 grammar reminder  225
 repeated events in past  32
 in reporting  74
V
verb complementation
 additional exercise  244
 direct and indirect objects 58
 negative forms  62
 prepositional object, with for / to 58
 verb + -ing  or bare inﬁnitive  60
 verb + object + bare inﬁnitive   60
 verb + object + to-inﬁnitive   62
 verb + object / possessive + -ing   60
 verb + preposition + object + to-
inﬁnitive  62
 verb + to have + past participle  62
 verb + to (preposition) + -ing   60
 see also  transitive / intransitive verbs 
verb phrases  209
verbs  208, 209
viewpoint adverbs  156, 205
 unknown / unimportant person or 
thing 96
state verbs  2, 12, 14, 166, 208
subject and complement  206
 deﬁnition of  208
 it-clause  as  48
 passive, uses of  48
placement of long  48
 relative pronouns as  106
 who  or what as 52
 see also  agreement; inversion 
subjunctive  209
 past  170
 present  78
subordinate clauses  206, 208
 see also  adverbial clauses; relative 
clauses
substitution
 to , for to-inﬁnitive clause  130
 additional exercise  248
 do   128, 200, 227 , 237
 do so  and such  126
 so  and not  124
 study planner  217–18
suggestions 54, 72, 78, 227
superlative forms
 the + adjective  with -est  144
 the + most + adjective   144
 of + plural noun phrase , after 
superlative  144
 in + singular noun phrase , after 
superlative  144
 adjectives with a / an, the, and zero 
article 92
 most + adjective / adverb   144
 noun + of which   110
T
tenses
 grammar reminder  222–24
 study planner  210–11
that-clauses 
 passive sentences  48
 reporting  66, 72, 76
 should  in  78
 wh-questions  with 54
the see a / an, the, and zero article 
there + be
 change of topic, topic known to 
listener / reader  190
 introducing topics  190
 noun following, agreement of be with  
190
 noun following, indeﬁnite / nonspeciﬁc 
meaning of  190
 with nouns followed by that, 
 wh , to-inﬁnitive or -ing clause  190
‘thinking’ verbs  30, 60
three-word verbs see two- and
three-word verbs
time adverbs  205
time clauses
 conjunctions  174
 tenses in  238
287
apparent  42
apparently  156
appeal 62
appear  2, 42, 46, 62, 124, 
132, 140, 164, 190, 192, 
228
apply 62
applying  138
appoint  44
appreciate  46, 154, 222
approve 60
approve of 60, 188
argue 66, 194
argue about / for / with 184
argument  76
arise  202
arms trade  86, 90
army  80
arrange  46, 62, 68
arrest  228
arts festival  86
as  144, 146, 158, 174, 198
as a consequence  174
as a result  174
as a rule  150
as if  170
as it were  170
as long as  174
as many  146
as much  146
as soon as 6, 20, 174
as though  170
as to 68, 76, 172
as well  174
ashamed  132, 140, 144, 186
aside  182
ask  44, 46, 56, 58, 62, 66, 
68, 72, 78, 130, 228
ask about / for / of  184
ask of  184
asleep  132
aspire to  56
associate with  56
association  80
assume  50, 56, 66, 124, 222
assuming (that)  174
assure 66
astonish  192
astonished  140
astonishingly  156
astounded  78
at no time  152
at that time  174
at the same time  174
athletics  84
atmosphere  90
atomic  132
attempt  46, 186
attract  2, 222
attribute to  56
audience  80
autumn  94
avail of  120
available  132
average  136
avoid  46, 228
awake  132, 202
award  44, 58
aware  42, 132, 140, 144
away  198
awful  134, 140
awkward  140
baby’s bedroom  86
back  198
bad  140
bald  42
ban  186
barely  96, 200
base on  56
be  42, 128, 130, 132 140, 
164, 202, 205
be able to  30, 130, 207 , 224
be about to 24, 26
be afraid  124
be allowed to  30, 207
be bound to  26
be certain  124
be due to  26
be going to  18, 20, 166, 223
be likely  34
be on the brink of  26
be on the point of  26
be on the verge of  26
be supposed to  28, 190, 226
be sure to  26, 124
be to  24
beach  90
bear  202
beat  202
beautiful  132
because  118, 160, 174, 206
because of  160
become  42, 132, 140, 164, 
202
before  20, 96, 118, 158 174, 
200
before that  174
beg  2, 78
begin  46, 56, 60, 130, 228, 
202
behave  120
believe  2, 30, 46, 50, 56 62, 
64, 66, 124, 194, 222, 228
belong  12, 166
belong to  222
belongings  84
below  176
bend  56, 202
beneath  176
besides  118, 174, 182
bet  202
between  178
alarmed / alarming  237
alert  144
alike  132, 144
alive  132
all  110, 206
all (of)  82, 102, 233, 234
all of a sudden  4
all over  176
all the same  174
allegation  76
allege  50, 62
alleged  138
allegedly  142
allocated  138
allow  46, 58, 62, 228
almost  102, 134, 150, 154
alone  132, 144, 154
along  176, 198
also  174
alternative  194
alternatively  174
although  118, 164, 174
altogether  154
always  4, 36, 150
amaze  192
amazed  78, 140
amazed / amazing  237
amazing  140
ambition  186
among  178
among other things  178
among others  178
amongst  178
amount of  100
amused  78
and  112, 174, 206
angry  76, 134, 140
announce  44, 50, 58, 66
announcement  76
annoy  192
annoyed  76, 140
annoying  140
annually  152
another  122
answer  56, 66, 76
answer back  188
anticipate  46, 222
anxious  78
any  96, 186, 232–33
any  82
any (of)  82, 233
anybody  98, 233
anyone  96, 98, 190, 233
anything  96, 98, 233
anyway  174
anywhere  98
apart  182
apart from  182
apologetic  76
apologise  2
appalling  78
Index of lexical items
a / an  88, 90, 92, 94, 146, 
190, 205, 206
a bit  134
a bit of  104
a few (of)  235
a little (of)  235
a lot (of)  82, 100, 234
a number of  82, 110
a / the majority of  82
ability  186
able  140
about  184
above  176
above all  174
absent from  120
absolute  132
absolutely  134
abusive  76
academic  136
accept  124, 194
accident  194
acclimatise  120
according to  156
account for  188
ache  222
acknowledge  2, 66
acknowledgement  76
across  176
act on  188
active  144
adamant  76
adapt 60, 120
adapted  42
address book  86
adhere to  56
adjust 60
admiration  186
admire  154
admit  2, 58, 60, 62, 66, 124, 
194, 228
adult  136
advertise  62
advice  76
advisable  78
advise  2, 46, 62, 66, 68 72, 
78, 130, 172
affected  138
afford  130
afraid  130, 132, 140 144
after 6, 20, 118, 158 174, 206
after all  174
after that  174
afternoon  94
afterwards  174
agitatedly  142
agree  2, 26, 46, 50, 62 66, 
72, 124, 130, 222, 228
agree about / on / with  184
agreed  76
aim  26, 46, 186, 228
alarmed  140
288
Index of lexical items
company director  92
complain 66
complete  132, 144
completely  134, 150
complex  144
complimentary  76
computer  90
computer keyboard  86
concentrate 60
concern  38, 186, 192
concern with  120
concerned  78, 132, 140, 172
conclude  2, 68
conclusion  76
confess  2, 60, 66
conﬁde 66
conﬁdence  102
conﬁdent  140
conﬂict  172
confusion  172
congratulate  2
congratulations  84
consent 62
consequently  174
consider  2, 8, 46, 50, 56, 62, 
66, 68, 172, 194, 222, 228
consist of  2, 222
constantly  4
constitute  222
contain  222
content  132
continually  4
continue  46, 228
conversation  90
convince 66
convinced  42
cook  56, 58
cost  2, 58, 186, 192, 202, 222
could  30, 34, 74, 128, 204, 
207 , 224, 225, 239
council  80
count 60, 62
count out  188
country(side)  90
cover up  188
cowardly  142
cow’s milk  86
crazy  140
creased  144
creep  202
crew  80
criteria  84
critical  76, 136
crop up  188
crowd  80
crucial  78
culminate in / with  56
cup of tea  86
curious  140
curiously  150
customs ofﬁcer  86
cut  202
cut back on  188
cut out  188
daily  152
dance  56
dare 60, 204, 207
dark  144
data  84
dawn  94
dawn on  192
day  102
deaf  42
deal  202
debate 68, 172
decide  30, 50, 62, 68
decision  76, 186
declare  2, 44, 56, 66
decline  228
decrease  56
deep  134
deep(ly)  142
deﬁnitely  156
delay  228
delighted  130
demand 66, 72, 78, 228
democratic  132
demonstrate  44, 50, 58
deny  2, 46, 58, 62, 66 96, 
194, 228
department  80
depend 60, 62
depend on  172
describe  44, 46, 58
description  186
deserve  130
deservedly  142
desire  186, 222
despite  164
deter 60
determination  186
determine 68
determined  130
determinedly  142
detest 60, 228
detract from  56
develop  150
diabetes  84
differ  150
differ from 222
differentiate between  56
difﬁcult  42, 140
dig  202
digital  132
digniﬁed  142
diplomatic  136
direct  78, 144
direct(ly)  142
disagree 66
disagreement  172
disappointed  78, 140
disappointedly  142
disapprove of  44, 60
discourage 60
discover  50, 68, 228
discuss 68, 172
discussion  76, 172, 186
dislike  12, 46, 60, 194, 228
care  150
care about / for  184
careful  140, 144
careless  144
carelessly  156
carry out  44
cast  202
cast back  44
catch  46,  58, 202, 229
catch out  188
cause 62, 228
caused  138
cautious  144
cease  228
certain  76, 140, 144
certainly  156
chance  102, 130, 186 194
change  56
cheap  144
cheap(ly)  142
check 66, 68
check into  188
chemical  132
chicken drumsticks  86
choice  194
choose  58, 68, 130, 172, 202
chosen  138
civil  136
claim  50, 76
class  80
clean  136
clean up  188
clear  140, 144
clear away  188
clearly  148, 150, 156
clear(ly)  142
clever  134
climate  90
climb  46
cling  227
close  56, 60
clothes  84
clothes shop  86
club  80
coal mine  86
coffee  90
coincidence  194
cold  144
collect  58
college  80
come  42, 46, 152, 198, 202, 
208, 228
come about  192
come across  110
come in for  188
come to  188
come up against  44, 188
command 62, 72, 78, 228
comment  76
commission  80
committee  80
common  134, 136
community  80
company  80
big  134
bind  202
biologically  156
birds’ nests  86
bite  202
bleed  202
blind  42
blow  202
book  58
bored  144
bored / boring  237
boring  144
both  110
both (of)  233
bother  38
boy’s arm  86
brave  140
bravely  156
break  56, 202
break in  188
break-out  86
brick-built  138
brieﬂy  148
bring  46, 58, 202
bring about  188
broadcast  202
broken  138
brother-in-law  86
brush up on  44
build  58, 202
building materials industry  
86
burn  56, 202
burst  202
busy  134, 140
busy with  120
but  174, 182, 206
but for  166, 182
buy  58, 202
by  94, 118, 180
by air  94
by bus  94
by car  94
by contrast  174
by email  94
by phone  94
by plane  94
by post  94
by sea  94
by taxi  94
by the time 6, 20
by train  94
calculate  50, 68
calculated  132
call  44
call back  44, 188
call on  72, 188
call up  44
campaign 62
can  30, 74, 128, 207 , 224, 225
can’t bear  46, 194
can’t stand  194, 229
capable  132
289
Index of lexical items
dismissive  76
dive  202
do  126, 128, 192, 200, 202, 
205, 227 , 237
do out of  188
do so  126
domestic  134
don’t have to  38, 226
doubt  2, 124, 166, 172, 222
doubtful  76, 140
down  198
downstairs  148
draw  202
dread  228
dreadfully  134
dream  202
dress  120
drink  56, 202
drink up  188
drive  56, 202
drop  56
duck’s eggs  86
due to  160
during  180
dwell  202
each  82, 102, 110, 122, 205, 
234
each of  82
each (of)  233
each other  236
eager  144
earlier  174
earnings  84
easy  140
easy-going  138
eat  56, 202
economic  132
economics  84
effect  186
either  122, 233
either ... or  82
either of  82
elderly  142
electorate  80
electric  136
emerge  192
emphasise  194
empty  136
enable 62, 228
encourage  50, 62, 72, 228
encouragement  76
end 60
end up  42
enemy  80
enjoy  46, 154, 166, 194, 228
enormously  150, 154
enough  146
entire  102, 132
entirely  134, 150, 160
entitle 62, 228
environment  90
environmental  132, 134
environmentally  156
envisage  228
envy  58
equal  144
equate with  56
especially  154
essential  78, 134
establish  50, 68
estimate  50
even  154
even if  164, 170
even so  174
even though  164, 174
evening  94
every  82, 102, 186, 234
every few (months)  102
every now and again  102
every other (kilometre)  102
every single (day)  102
every so often  102, 150
everybody  82
everyone  82
everything  82
exact  144
excellent  134
except  182
except for  182
excepted  182
excited / exciting  237
excitedly  142
exclusively  134
expect  2, 8, 26, 46 50, 54, 
64, 66, 72 124, 130, 222
explain  44, 50, 66, 68
explanation  76
extremely  134, 154
face  46
fail  56, 62, 96, 130, 228
failure  186
fair  144
fairly  134
fall  202, 228
fall through  188
false  136
familiarise with  120
family  80
far-reaching  138
fashion  142
fast  134
fast-growing  138
favourite  144
fear  38, 90, 186
federation  80
feed  202
feel  2, 30, 44, 46, 50, 60 
64, 66, 132, 140, 164 194, 
202, 222, 228
feel like  228
fetch  58
few  104, 146
few (of)  235
fewer  104
ﬁght  202
ﬁll in  110
ﬁnally  148
ﬁnancially  150, 156
ﬁnd  2, 46, 50, 56, 58, 66, 
194, 202, 222 228
ﬁnd out  46, 68
ﬁne  132
ﬁne(ly)  142
ﬁnish  56, 60, 228
ﬁrst  122, 150, 152
ﬁt  2, 202
ﬁx  58
ﬂat(ly)  142
ﬂee  202
ﬂick through  188
ﬂing  202
ﬂy  152, 198, 202
focus 60
follow  192
fond  186
fondness  186
foolish  140
foolishly  156
for  12, 14, 174, 184
for one thing  174
for (reasons)  160
forbid  2, 96, 202
force 62, 227 , 228
forecast  76, 202
foreign  136
forever  4
forget  46, 60, 62, 68, 130, 
202
forgive  58, 202
formal  144
forwards  148
found  138
frankly  150, 156
free  140
free(ly)  142
freeze  202
frequent  144
friendly  134, 142
frighten  192
frightened  132
frightened / frightening  
237
from my / his / her
perspective  156
from time to time  150
fully  134
fun  144
furious  140
furniture  96
furthermore  174
future  90
gather  124
gather up  188
general  132
generally  156
generation  80
generously  156
genuine  136
get  42, 58, 132, 202, 227
get down  44, 188
get up  188
girls’ school  86
give  44, 58, 202
glad  132, 140
glasses case  86
go  42, 146, 152, 198, 202, 
228
go bad  42
go bust  42
go dead  42
go missing  42
go mouldy  42
go off  42
go on  62
go over  188
go rotten  42
go through with  188
go up  150
go wrong  42
goat’s cheese  86
good  140, 194
good and  136
good-looking  138
goods  84
government  80
grab  228
grammar  90
grateful  76
greatly  150
ground  90
group  80
grow  42, 202
grow up  188
grumble 66
guarantee  2, 26, 58, 72 76, 
194
guess 68, 124
guess so / not  124
guilty  136, 140
gymnastics  84
habit  186
had better  40, 207 , 224
hair  90
hair-raising  138
hand  44, 58
hang  152, 202
hanger-on  86
happen  168, 192, 228
happily  142
happy  134, 140
hard  140
hardly  38, 96, 150, 158, 
200, 225
hardly ever  150, 152
hate  46, 60, 130, 194 222, 
228
have  2, 60, 62, 114, 128, 
202, 205, 222
have got  128
have got to  36, 207 , 224, 
225–26
have to  36, 38, 74, 225–26
290
Index of lexical items
hear  30, 44, 46, 60, 124 
202, 222, 228
hear out  188
help  44, 60, 192, 228
help on with  188
help out  188
hence  174
her  122
here  82
here comes  198
herself  120, 236
hesitate  228
hide  120, 202
high(ly)  142
himself  120, 236
hit  192, 202, 228
hold  56, 202
hold out  188
hold over  44
holiday  180
home-made  138
honestly  150, 156
hope  8, 10, 26, 46, 50 54, 
62, 72, 102, 124 130, 194, 
222, 228
horizon  90
hourly  152
how  52, 68, 82, 146 196, 
209
however  174, 208
huge  134
hugely  134
human  136
human race  90
hurriedly  142
hurt  192, 202
I bet  18
I expect  18
I gather  4
I hear  4
I hope  18
I imagine  18
I reckon  18
I see  4
I think  18
I understand  4
I wonder  18
idea  130, 186
ideal  144
identiﬁed  138
ideologically  156
if  20, 64, 166, 172, 174, 200, 
206
if not  172
if only  170
if so  174
ill  42, 132
illness  180
I’m sure  18
imaginable  132
imagine  2, 46, 60, 68 124, 
170, 222, 228
immensely  134
imperative  78
importance  90
important  78, 134
impossible  96, 134, 140
improvement  186
in  118, 180, 198
in addition  174
in amazement  142
in any case  174
in case  20
in consequence  174
in contrast  174
in my / his / her opinion  156
in order that  162
in order to  162
in spite of  164
in such a way that  162
in that  160, 174
inability  186
inappropriate  78
inasmuch as  160
incline to / towards  56
inclined  140
included  138
income tax  86
inconceivable  78
increase  56
indicate 66
indication  76
indifferent  172
individual  136
industrially  156
infected  42
inﬂict on  56
inﬂuence  186
inform  50, 66, 68
innocent  136
insist 60, 78
insistent  76
insofar as  174
instead  174
institute  80
instruct  46, 68, 72, 78
instruction  76
insulting  76
intake  86
intend  8, 26, 50, 64 72, 78, 
130
intensely  134
intention  186
interested  42, 138
interested / interesting  237
interesting  140
interestingly  156
Internet  90
interview  186
introduce  44, 58
invaluable  134
invitation  76
invite 62, 72, 228
involved  132
iron  90
irrelevant  42
issue  76
it  50, 140, 192, 194
it says here  4
itself  236
joke 66
journalist  92
judge  56
jury  80
just  154
just(ly)  142
keep  42, 46, 60, 202
keep on 62
kind  140
kindly  142, 156
kneel  202
knit  202
know  2, 12, 50, 60, 68 124, 
166, 202, 222
know about / of  184
lack  186
lamb chops  86
largely  134, 154, 160
last  150
late  136
late(ly)  142
later  174
lay  202
lead  202
lean  202
leap  202
learn 68, 202
learn about / of  184
least  144
leave  58, 194, 208, 202
leave out  188
lend  44, 58, 207 , 202
less  104, 144, 146
less (of)  235
let 60, 202
let go 60
let in  44
let in on  188
let out  44
lie  152, 202
light  202
like  2, 46, 60, 130, 154 166, 
194, 202, 228
likelihood  186
likewise  174
linguistics  84
lion’s den  86
little  104, 146, 200
little (of)  235
little ones  122
live  152
live up to  188
lively  142
logically  156
London-based  138
lone  132
lonely  142
long  62, 72
long-lasting  138
longest-serving  138
look  2, 42, 164, 222
look after  110, 188
look down on  188
look forward 60
look forward to  154
look out  188
look to  26
look up  188
look up to  188
looker-on  86
lose  202
lots of  100, 234
loud(ly)  142
love  2, 46, 60, 130, 194, 228
loved ones  122
lovely  140, 142
lovely and  136
low  134
luckily  156
lucky ones  122
mad  140
made-up  138
mainly  134, 154, 160
majority of  82
make  44, 58, 60, 140, 202
make up  188
manage  62, 228
manner  142
many  100, 110, 146
many (of)  233, 234
march  152
mathematics  84
matter  228
maximum  132
may  34, 74, 128, 207 , 225
me  208
meal  180
mean  8, 26, 46, 130 140, 
192, 202, 222, 228
means  84
meanwhile  174
measles  84
measure  2, 222
media  84
medical  132
medically  156
meet  202
mend  58
mention  44, 50, 58, 66 194
mere  132
mess up  188
midday  94
midnight  94
might  34, 128, 204, 207 , 
225, 239
mind  46, 228
mine  208
minimum  132
miserable  140
miss  228
mistake for  56
mobile  136
291
Index of lexical items
modern  144
money-making  138
month  102
monthly  152
morally  156
more  144
more and more  136
more wrong  144
moreover  174
morning  94
most  110, 144
mostly  154
most(ly)  142
move  56, 120
move off  188
mow  202
much  100, 146, 154
much (of)  233, 234
must  36, 40, 74, 128, 207
mustn’t  36, 38, 74, 226
my  122, 206
myself  120, 236
name  2, 44
namely  112
naturally  150, 156
nearby  150
nearly  102, 134, 150
need  38, 46, 130, 194, 207 , 
224, 228
needn’t  38, 226
neither  122, 200
neither do I  200, 237
neither / nor  82
neither of  82, 110
neither (of)  233
nerve-wracking  138
nervous  140
never  36, 38, 54, 96, 98, 
150, 200, 225
nevertheless  174
news  84
next  150, 152
nice  140
nice and  136
night  102
no  54, 98, 182, 186, 200, 233
no amount of  98
no bother  98
no chance  98
no comment  98
no idea  98
no longer  194
no one  38, 98
no problem  98
no sooner  158
no sooner than  200
no way  98
no wonder  98
nobody  38, 54, 98, 182
no(body)  190
nominate  44
none (of)  82, 98, 110, 233
noon  94
nor  200
nor do I  200
normally  36
northern  132
not  200
not a single  98
not any  98, 186
not certain  76
not many  104
not much  104
not once  152
not one  98
nothing  54, 182
notice  46, 60, 66, 68 194, 
222, 228
notify 66
now  152
nowhere  54, 98
number of  82, 100
object 60
obligatory  78
observation  76
observe  44, 46, 60, 228
obvious  42
obviously  156
occasional  132
occupy ... with  120
odd  136, 140
oddly  150
of  144, 184
off  198
offer  44, 58, 62, 72, 228
ofﬁce-worker  86
often  150
old  136
on  118, 184
on condition that  174
on many occasions  150
on the contrary  174
on the other hand  174
once 6
once a week  152
one  88, 122
one another  88, 236
one of  82
ones  122
oneself  120
only  38, 154, 200, 225
only later  152
open  56, 60
opportunity  130, 186
opposite  132
opposition  80
option  186
or  112, 174
orchestra  80
order  2, 46, 58, 62, 72, 76, 
78, 228
order about  188
original  136
otherwise  174
ought to  40, 128, 204, 207 , 
224, 226
ourselves  236
out  198
outcome  86
outskirts  84
outwardly  156
over  176, 180
overheads  84
overhear 60, 228
owe  58, 194
owing to 160
own  2, 222
own up 60
panic  38
park  56
part  110
particular  136
particularly  154
particulars  84
partly  160
pass  58
passer-by  86
past  90
pause  56
pay  58, 192, 202, 228
peace-keeping  138
peculiar  144
pen top  86
people  48, 84
per cent  84
perfect  134, 144
perfectly  134
permission  186
permit  2, 58
personally  156
persuade  50, 62, 66, 72, 228
phenomena  84
phone  56
phonetics  84
physically  156
physics  84
pick up  188
plainly  150
plan  8, 10, 26, 50, 62 64, 
68, 186, 228
plans  130
play  56, 58
pleased  140, 144
pleased / pleasing  237
pleasure  90
plenty of  82, 100
point  194
point out  58, 66
pointedly  142
police  84
politically  156
politics  84
popular  134
population  80
positive  140
possess  222
possibility  186
possible  132
post  58
pour  58
practically  134
predict  2, 194
prefer  2, 46, 78, 130 154, 
194, 222, 228
pregnant  42
premises  84
prepare  120, 228
prepared  140
present  90
press  80
presumably  150, 156
presume 66, 124
pretend 62
pretty  134
prevail 62
prevent 60, 96
previously  174
pride  186
pride on  120
primarily  134
private  136
probability  186
probably  156
problem  76, 186
professional  136
prohibit 60, 96
promise  2, 26, 66, 72 76, 
124, 130
pronounce  56
proper  132
property  90
proposal  186
propose  26, 44, 50, 64 66, 
72, 78
prospect  186
proud  186
prove  42, 56, 58, 164, 202
provide for  188
provided  20, 138
provided that  174
public  80, 136
publications department  
86
pull  228
pull to  188
push to  188
push-up  86
put  203
put down as  188
put out  44
put up to  188
put up with  188
quarterly  152
question  76, 172, 194
quickly  142, 148
quick(ly)  142
quiet  134
quietly  148
quit  203
quite  150, 238
rabies  84
rarely  36, 96, 150, 152, 200
292
Index of lexical items
rather  134, 150, 170
read  44, 56, 58, 203
read-out  86
ready  140
ready-made  138
real  144
realise  2, 68, 222
really  134, 154
reason  102, 108, 186, 194
reasonably  134
reassure  50, 66
recall  46, 60, 62, 228
recent  144
reckon  54
recognised  42
recommend  50, 66, 72, 78
recommendation  76
refusal  76, 186
refuse  2, 46, 58, 62,  72 96, 
130, 228
regard  194
regard as / with  56
region to region  94
regret  2, 62, 154, 222, 228
regularly  150
reluctance  186
reluctant  96
rely 60, 62
remain  42
remaining  138
remember  30, 46, 60, 62 
68, 166, 194, 228
remind  2, 50, 62, 66, 68, 72
remind of  56
repair  58
repeatedly  142
reply 66, 76
report  44, 46, 50, 56, 58 
66, 228
reportedly  142
reputedly  142
request  2, 72, 78
require  46, 66, 78
resemble  222
resent  46, 60, 194, 228
resolve  26
resort 60
responsible  132
result from  188
resulting  138
reveal  50
rich  134
riches  84
ride  203
right  144
right across  176
rightly  156
ring  203
rip  56
rise  203
risk  186, 228
roll  152
rough  144
run  152, 203
run into  188
runner-up  86
sad  140
sadly  156
satisfaction  186
satisﬁed  186
save  58
savings  84
savings account  86
saw  203
say  50, 54, 58, 62, 66 68, 
72, 124, 203, 229
scarcely  96, 150, 158 200
scare  192
school  80
scientiﬁc  136
scornful  76
sea  90
seaside  90
secret  194
see  30, 44, 50, 60, 68 194, 
203, 222, 228
seeing as  160
seeing that  160
seek  203
seem  42, 46, 62, 124 132, 
164, 190, 192, 222
seen  140
seldom  96, 150, 152, 200
self  120
sell  58, 203, 228
selves  120
send  44, 46, 58, 203
sense  186
seriously  150, 156
set  203
sew  203
shake  203
shall  40, 74, 128, 207
shall / shan’t 26
shame  186
shampoo  90
shave  120
she  208
shear  203
shed  203
sheer  132
shine  203
shock  192, 228
shocked  78, 140
shoot  203
shoot down  188
shop around  188
short-term  138
short(ly)  142
should  40, 74, 128, 198, 
207 , 224, 226
show  46, 50, 58, 62, 66 
68, 228
shrink  203
shut  56, 203
shut up  188
sign  186
similar  132
similarly  174
simple  140
simply  134, 154
since 6, 12, 14, 118, 174
since (because)  160, 174
sing  56, 58, 203
sink  203
sit  152, 203
sky  90
sleep  207 , 203
sleeping  132
slide  203
slightly  134, 150
sling  203
slowly  148
slow(ly)  142
small-scale  138
smell  30, 203, 222
smoke  56
so  146, 174, 200
so as to  162
so do I  200, 237
so far  180
so long as  174
so that  162, 174
soft  144
soft-spoken  138
solely  154
some  96, 110, 122, 206, 232
some  82
some (of)  82, 233
somebody  48, 96, 233
someone  48, 96, 233
something  48, 96, 190, 233
sometimes  36, 148
somewhat  154
soon  174
sooner  158, 170, 200
sorry  132, 140
sort out  188
sound  2, 42, 90, 164, 222
sour-tasting  138
sow  203
speak 60, 203
special  144
specialise in  56
speciﬁcally  154
speculate 66, 68
speculation  76, 172
speed  203
spell  203
spend  203
spill  203
spin  203
spit  203
splash out  188
split  203
split up  188
spoil  203
spot  229
spread  203
spring  94, 203
staff  84
stairs  84
stand  152, 203
stand up  188
start  46, 56, 60, 62, 130, 
228–29
state-of-the-art  86
statement  76
statistics  84
stay  42, 180
steal  203
stick  203
sting  203
stink  203
stipulate  78
stolen  138
stop 60, 228–29
straight  136
strange-sounding  138
strike  192, 203
strive  203
strong  134
study  56
stupid  140
stupidly  156
subdued  142
subsequently  174
such  200
such that  162
suddenly  4, 142
suffer  150
sufﬁciently  146
suggest  2, 44, 50, 54, 58, 
66, 72, 78, 124, 228
suggestion  76, 130
suitable  132
summer  94
sun  90
superb  134
suppose  20, 50, 54, 64, 
124, 170
supposed to  28, 190, 226
supposedly  142
supposing  20, 170, 174
sure  76, 132, 140
surprise  192, 194
surprised  78
surprised / surprising  237
surprisingly  156
surroundings  84
suspect  124
suspicious  42
swear  72, 203
sweep  203
sweet-smelling  138
swell  203
swim  152, 207 , 203
swing  203
sympathetic  76
sympathy  102
tactful  76
take  58, 192, 194, 203, 207
take after  44, 188
293
Index of lexical items
take against  188
take on  110
take over  188
take up on  188
taken  138
talk 60
talk about / of / on / with 
68, 172, 184
talk down to  44
talk out of  188
taste  30, 192, 222
tea cup  86
tea leaf  86
teach  44, 46, 58, 62, 66, 68, 
203, 228
team  80
tear  203
tear away from  120
technical  136
technically  156
tell  44, 46, 50, 58, 60, 62, 
66, 68, 72, 124, 203, 
228–29
tell apart  188
tend  46, 190
terrible  134, 140
terriﬁc  140
than  198
thank  2
thanks  84
that  106, 110, 122, 138, 196, 
208, 229
that is  112
the  92, 94, 122, 144, 205, 
206
the afﬂuent  122
the disadvantaged  122
the elderly  122
the homeless  122
the low-paid  122
the main  122
the majority of  82
the minute / second /  
moment 6
the number of  82
the only  122
the poor  122
the position of  92
the post of  92
the privileged  122
the rich  122
the role of  92
the slightest  186
the sole  186
the way 68
the wealthy  122
the whole of  180
the young  122
their  206
themselves  120, 236
then  152, 174
there  50, 82, 190
there goes  198
there is  190
therefore  174
these  122, 229
they  48
they say  4
think  2, 8, 10, 50, 54, 56, 
62, 64, 66, 68, 124, 194, 
203, 222
think about  8, 68, 172
think of  8, 10, 60
thin(ly)  142
this  92, 122, 206, 229
this morning / week /  
month 6
those  122, 138
though  164, 174
thoughtful  140
threat  76
threaten 62, 72
through  118, 176, 180
throughout  176, 180
throw  44, 58, 203, 228
throw away  188
thrust  203
thus  174
tidy up  188
till  180
tired  140
tired / tiring  237
title  44
to  130
to date  180
to my / his / her knowledge  
156
today 6
tomorrow  150
too  146, 154, 174
total  132
totally  134
touch  228
town  90
transpire  192
travel industry  90
tread  203
treatment  180
tree-lined  138
tremendous  134
tremendously  154
trouble about / with  120
true  136, 144
try  130, 228
try out  188
turn  42
turn in  188
turn out  42, 192
unable  96, 140
unaware  140
unbelievably  156
uncertain  76, 140, 172
uncertainty  172
uncomfortable  140
undecided  172
under  176
underlying  132
underneath  176
understand  2, 12, 30, 46 
50, 66, 68, 124, 166 194, 
203, 222
undertake  26
undoubtedly 156
undress  120
unexpectedly  142
unhappy  42, 140
unique  134, 144
university  80
unknown  134
unless  20, 172, 174
unlikely  96
unnecessary  78
unprofessional  140
unreasonable  140
unsure  132, 140, 172
unsure,
not sure  76
until 6, 20, 158, 174, 180, 
200
until now  180
unwell  132
unwillingness  186
up  198
up till  180
up to  180
up-to-date  86
upset  78, 140, 192
upstairs  148
urge  72, 78
urgent  78
use  194
use up  188
used to  32, 74, 190, 207 , 
224, 225
usually  148
utter  132
utterly  134
vary  56, 150
very  134, 154
very much 154
view  194
violently  148
virtually  102, 134, 154
visit  180
visually  156
vital  78
volunteer 62, 72
vote  44
vow  72
wait 62, 228
wake  56, 203
walk  152
want  8, 10, 26, 46, 64 72, 
130, 228, 229
warn  2, 50, 62, 66, 68 72, 
78, 228, 229
warning  76, 78
wash  56, 120
wash up  56, 188
watch 60, 229
wave  56
way  142, 186
we  48
weak  134
wear  203
weave  203
week  102
weekly  152
weep  203
weigh  2, 222
welcome  140
well  132
well-behaved  138
well-resourced  138
were  170
wet  203
what  52, 64, 68, 76 108, 
227
what if  20
what with  118
whatever  108
what’s more  174, 208
when 6, 20, 54, 68, 108, 158, 
174, 196, 200, 208
whenever  118, 174
where 64, 68, 82, 108, 196, 
208
whereabouts  84
whereas  164, 174
whereby  108
whether 64, 68, 76, 172
which  52, 64, 68, 106, 110, 
122, 196, 208, 209, 227
whichever  108
while  20, 118, 158, 164, 174, 
206
whilst  164
who  52, 64, 68, 106, 108, 
196, 208, 209, 227
whoever  108
whole  102, 134
whom  52, 106, 110, 209
whose  52, 108, 209, 227
why 68, 108, 196, 209
wide(ly)  142
wild  136
will  18, 20, 26, 32, 128, 207 , 
225
willing  140
willingness 186
win  56, 203
wind  203
wind up  188
winter  94, 102
wisely  156
wish  170, 228
with  118, 184
with confusion  142
without  96, 118
woman’s face  86
women’s clinic  86
wonder  4, 8, 68
wonderful  134, 140
world  90
294
Index of lexical items
worn  144
worried  42, 140, 144
worried / worrying  237
worriedly  142
worry  38, 192
would  32, 74, 128, 207 , 224, 
225, 239
would like  130
would rather  170
would sooner  170
wring  203
write  56, 58, 203
wrong  144
wrongly  156
yesterday  152
yet  174
you  48
young  134
your  122, 206
yours  208
yourself  120, 236
yourselves 236
